***Things to know about the COVID-19 Pandemic
Three Important Ways to Slow the Spread
Wear a mask to protect yourself and others and stop the spread of COVID-19.
Stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from others who don’t live with you.
Avoid crowds. The more people you are in contact with, the more likely you are to be exposed to COVID-19.

How to Protect Yourself When Going Out
Wear a mask that covers your nose and mouth to help protect yourself and others.
Stay 6 feet apart from others who don’t live with you.
Avoid crowds.
Avoid poorly ventilated indoor spaces.
Wash your hands often with soap and water. Use hand sanitizer if soap and water aren’t available.

If You are at Risk of Getting Very Sick
People of any age can get COVID-19, even healthy young adults and children.
People who are older or have certain underlying medical conditions are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19.
Other groups may be at higher risk for getting COVID-19 or having more severe illness.

What to Do If You're Sick
Stay home except to get medical care.
Isolate yourself from other members of your family to prevent spread to them and the people that they may have contact with, like grandparents.
Even if you don’t feel sick, you can spread COVID-19 to others.
Get care immediately if you are having emergency warning signs, like trouble breathing, pain or pressure in chest.

How to Get a Test for Current Infection
You can visit your state or local health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and choose to not get tested, it is important to stay home. Find out what to do if you are sick.

How to Cope with Stress
Care for yourself one small way each day.
Unwind by doing yoga, listening to music, or gardening.
Find new ways to connect with family and friends, get support, and share feelings.
Eat healthy foods and get enough rest
Relax by reading, listening to music, or starting a new hobby.

What Symptoms to Watch For
The most common symptoms of COVID-19 are
Fever
Cough
Headaches
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Nausea
Diarrhea
Other symptoms are signs of serious illness. If someone has trouble breathing, chest pain or pressure, or difficulty staying awake, get medical care immediately.

***Symptoms of Coronavirus
What you need to know
Anyone can have mild to severe symptoms.
Older adults and people who have severe underlying medical conditions like heart or lung disease or diabetes seem to be at higher risk for developing more serious complications from COVID-19 illness.

Watch for symptoms
People with COVID-19 have had a wide range of symptoms reported – ranging from mild symptoms to severe illness. Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to the virus. People with these symptoms may have COVID-19:
Fever or chills
Cough
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Fatigue
Muscle or body aches
Headache
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Congestion or runny nose
Nausea or vomiting
Diarrhea

What is the difference between Influenza (Flu) and COVID-19?
Influenza (Flu) and COVID-19 are both contagious respiratory illnesses, but they are caused by different viruses. COVID-19 is caused by infection with a new coronavirus (called SARS-CoV-2), and flu is caused by infection with influenza viruses.
COVID-19 seems to spread more easily than flu and causes more serious illnesses in some people. It can also take longer before people show symptoms and people can be contagious for longer. More information about differences between flu and COVID-19 is available in the different sections below.
Because some of the symptoms of flu and COVID-19 are similar, it may be hard to tell the difference between them based on symptoms alone, and testing may be needed to help confirm a diagnosis.
While more is learned every day about COVID-19 and the virus that causes it, there is still a lot that is unknown. 

***COVID-19 Testing Overview
Two kinds of tests are available for COVID-19: viral tests and antibody tests.
A viral test tells you if you have a current infection.
An antibody test might tell you if you had a past infection.

Who should get tested
People who have symptoms of COVID-19.
People who have had close contact (within 6 feet for a total of 15 minutes or more) with someone with confirmed COVID-19.
People who have taken part in activities that put them at higher risk for COVID-19 because they cannot socially distance as needed, such as travel, attending large social or mass gatherings, or being in crowded indoor settings.
People who have been asked or referred to get testing by their healthcare provider, local  or state ​health department.
Not everyone needs to be tested. If you do get tested, you should self-quarantine/isolate at home pending test results and follow the advice of your health care provider or a public health professional.

How to get tested for current COVID-19 infection
You can visit your state or health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.

Results
If you test positive, know what protective steps to take to prevent others from getting sick.
If you test negative, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected. The test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing. Continue to take steps to protect yourself.

***Test for Current Infection (Viral Test)
Viral tests are used to look for current infection
A viral test checks specimens from your nose or your mouth (saliva) to find out if you are currently infected with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19. Two types of viral tests can be used:

Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) detect the virus’s genetic material and are commonly used in laboratories. NAATs are generally more accurate, but sometimes take longer to process than other test types.
Antigen tests detect viral proteins and are generally not as sensitive as NAATs, particularly if the antigen test is used on someone without COVID-19 symptoms. If you have a positive or negative antigen test, your healthcare provider may need to confirm the test result with a NAAT.

How to get a viral test
You can visit your state or health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing.

If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first.
If you have symptoms of COVID-19 and are not tested, it is important to stay home. Find out what to do if you are sick.
Both types of viral tests are available for at-home use.

What to do after a viral test
If you test positive for COVID-19, know what protective steps to take if you are sick.
Most people have mild COVID-19 illness and can recover at home without medical care. Contact your healthcare provider if your symptoms get worse or if you have questions about your health.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you probably were not infected at the time your sample was collected. This does not mean you will not get sick:
A negative test result only means that you did not have COVID-19 at the time of testing or that your sample was collected too early in your infection.
You could also be exposed to COVID-19 after the test and then get infected and spread the virus to others.
If you have symptoms later, you may need another test to determine if you are infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
To get your test result, please check with the group that performed your test, such as your healthcare provider or health department. How long it will take to get your test results depends on the test used. If you used an at-home test, follow the guidance above.

***Test for Past Infection

Antibody or serology tests look for antibodies in your blood to determine if you had a past infection with the virus that causes COVID-19.

Antibodies are proteins created by your body’s immune system soon after you have been infected or vaccinated.
Antibodies help you fight off infections and can protect you from getting that disease again. How long this protection may last is different for each disease and each person.
Antibody tests should not be used to diagnose a current infection with the virus that causes COVID-19, except in instances in which viral testing is delayed. An antibody test may not show if you have a current infection because it can take 1–3 weeks after the infection for your body to make antibodies.

How to get an antibody test
Decisions about testing are made by state or health departments or healthcare providers.​

Antibody tests for COVID-19 are available through healthcare providers and laboratories. Check with your healthcare provider to see if they offer antibody tests and whether you should get one.

What do your results mean?
If you test positive
A positive test result shows you may have antibodies from an infection with the virus that causes COVID-19. However, there is a chance that a positive result means you have antibodies from an infection with a different virus from the same family of viruses (called coronaviruses). Note: Other coronaviruses cannot produce a positive result on a viral test for SARS-CoV-2.
Having antibodies to the virus that causes COVID-19 may provide protection from getting infected with the virus again. But even if it does, we do not know how much protection the antibodies may provide or how long this protection may last. Confirmed and suspected cases of reinfection have been reported, but remain rare.
Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means. Your provider may suggest you take a second type of antibody test to see if the first test was accurate.
You should continue to protect yourself and others since you could get infected with the virus again.
If you work in a job where you wear personal protective equipment (PPE), continue wearing PPE.
You may test positive for antibodies even if you have never had symptoms of COVID-19. This can happen if you had an infection without symptoms, which is called an asymptomatic infection.

If you test negative
You may not have ever had COVID-19. Talk with your healthcare provider about your test result and the type of test you took to understand what your result means.
You could have a current infection or been recently infected.
The test may be negative because it typically takes 1–3 weeks after infection for your body to make antibodies. It’s possible you could still get sick if you have been exposed to the virus recently. This means you could still spread the virus.
Some people may take even longer to develop antibodies, and some people who are infected may not ever develop antibodies.
If you get symptoms after the antibody test, you might need another test called a viral test​. Viral tests identify the virus in samples from your respiratory system, such as a swab from the inside of your nose.

Regardless of whether you test positive or negative, the results do not confirm whether you are able to spread the virus that causes COVID-19. Until we know more, continue to take steps to protect yourself and others.

***At-Home Testing

You and your healthcare provider might consider either an at-home collection kit or an at-home test if you have signs and symptoms of COVID-19 and if you can’t get tested by a healthcare provider.
At-home collection kits and tests are available either by prescription or over the counter in a pharmacy or retail store without a prescription. Currently available at-home tests look for current infection.

Collecting Specimens
Wash your hands, then follow the instructions included with the specimen collection or test kit for collecting your own nasal or saliva specimen.

For the best results, collect and handle the specimens according to the manufacturer’s  instructions. If you don’t collect the specimens as directed, your test results may be incorrect.
Some tests require a nasal specimen that can be collected using an anterior nasal swab or a nasal mid-turbinate swab. Other tests require a saliva specimen.
Once collected, send the specimen to a testing facility or use the specimen, as described in the manufacturer’s instructions, to complete the at-home test.

Performing the Test
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions exactly and in the order specified. The manufacturer may also provide other resources, such as quick reference guides or instructional videos, to help you perform the test correctly.

Tips
Store all test components according to the manufacturer’s instructions until ready for use.
Don’t use expired tests or test components that are damaged or discolored.
Disinfect the countertop, table, or other surface where you will do the test.
Don’t open test devices or other test components until the testing process is about to occur.
Read and record test results only within the amount of time specified in the manufacturer’s instructions. A result read before or after the specified timeframe may not be correct.
Don’t reuse test devices or other components.
After you have the results, discard the specimen collection swab and test kit in the trash, disinfect all surfaces that the specimen may have touched, and wash your hands.

Reporting Results
Communicate your results to your healthcare provider, who is responsible for reporting your test results to the state health department. If the at-home test has an app that allows you to report your results to the state health department, inform your healthcare provider whether you used that app for results reporting.

If Your Test Is Negative
A negative test result means that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, was not found in your specimen. If you took the test while you had symptoms and followed all instructions carefully, a negative result usually means your current illness is not COVID-19.

However, it is possible for a test to give a negative result in some people who have COVID-19 (that is, a false negative). You could also test negative if the sample was collected too early in your infection. In this case, you could test positive later during your illness. Discuss your symptoms and test results with your healthcare provider to determine if you need follow-up testing.

If you have COVID-19 symptoms, especially if you have been exposed to someone who has COVID-19, you should quarantine according to CDC recommendations.

If Your Test Is Positive
Tell your healthcare provider about your positive test result and stay in contact with them during your illness. To avoid spreading the virus to others, follow CDC recommendations. See CDC’s guidance Isolate if You are Sick, which has information for a person who tests positive and has symptoms, and for a person who doesn’t have symptoms.


Tell your healthcare provider about your positive test result and stay in contact with them during your illness. To avoid spreading the virus to others, follow CDC recommendations. See CDC’s guidance Isolate if You are Sick, which has information for a person who tests positive and has symptoms, and for a person who doesn’t have symptoms.

If Your Result Shows Invalid or Error
Sometimes the results are not clear or are inconclusive, and the test is unable to tell you if your results are positive or negative.

If the display on the at-home test shows an invalid result or a test error, the test did not work properly. If this happens, please refer to the instructions for use in the package insert and contact the manufacturer for assistance.

Invalid results can occur for many reasons. Your specimen may not have been collected correctly or the testing instrument may have malfunctioned. However, such invalid results should not happen often.

Regardless of what your test results are, you should always review the results with your healthcare provider. Your healthcare provider will consider the test result together with your symptoms and possible exposure in deciding how to care for you.

***Contact Tracing
Contact tracing slows the spread of COVID-19
Contact tracing helps protect you, your family, and your community by:

Letting people know they may have been exposed to COVID-19 and should monitor their health for signs and symptoms of COVID-19.
Helping people who may have been exposed to COVID-19 get tested.
Asking people to self-isolate if they have COVID-19 or self-quarantine if they are a close contact.

During contact tracing, the health department staff will not ask you for:

Money
Social Security number
Bank account information
Salary information
Credit card numbers

Contact tracing for COVID-19 works best with everyday preventive actions
You can take everyday preventive actions to slow the spread of COVID-19. Doing so is especially important until a vaccine or better treatments become widely available. At this time, if you have been vaccinated for COVID-19, you should follow existing CDC guidance on when and how long to self-isolate if you have COVID-19 or self-quarantine if you are a close contact. CDC continues to closely monitor the evolving science for information that would warrant changes to the recommendations for quarantine of close contacts.​

What you can expect to happen
If you were around someone diagnosed with COVID-19
If you were around someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you.

Stay home and away from others:

Stay away from others, especially people who are at higher risk for getting very sick from COVID-19, such as older adults and people with other medical conditions, if possible.
If you have been around someone with COVID-19, stay home and away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person and monitor your health.
If you have a fever, cough or other symptoms of COVID-19, stay home and away from others (except to get medical care or testing, if recommended).
If you need support or assistance while in self-quarantine, your health department or community organizations may be able to provide assistance.
The best way to protect yourself and others is to stay home for 14 days if you think you’ve been exposed to someone who has COVID-19. Check your local health department’s website for information about options in your area to possibly shorten this quarantine period.
For COVID-19, a close contact is anyone who was within 6 feet of an infected person for a total of 15 minutes or more. An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting from 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person has any symptoms or tests positive for COVID-19. A person is still considered a close contact even if they were wearing a mask while they were around someone with COVID-19.
Monitor your health:

Watch for fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19. Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to COVID-19.
Answer the phone call from the health department. If someone from the health department calls you, answer the call to help slow the spread of COVID-19 in your community.

Discussions with health department staff are confidential. This means that your personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.
Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with. The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for a total of 15 minutes or more) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.
Tell the health department staff if you develop symptoms of COVID-19. If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek emergency medical care.

If you are waiting for a COVID-19 test result
If you think you may have COVID-19 and are waiting for a COVID-19 test result, stay home and monitor your health to protect your friends, family and others from possibly getting COVID-19.

Stay home and away from others:

Stay away from others while waiting for your COVID-19 test result, especially people who are at higher risk for getting very sick from COVID-19, such as older adults and people with other medical conditions, if possible.
If you have been around someone with COVID-19, stay home and away from others for 14 days (self-quarantine) after your last contact with that person and monitor your health.
If you have a fever, cough or other symptoms of COVID-19, stay home and away from others (except to get medical care).
If you need support or assistance while in self-quarantine, your health department or community organizations may be able to provide assistance.
The best way to protect yourself and others is to stay home for 14 days if you think you’ve been exposed to someone who has COVID-19. Check your local health department’s website for information about options in your area to possibly shorten this quarantine period.
Monitor your health:

Watch for fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19. Remember, symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure to COVID-19.
Think about the people you have recently been around. While you wait for your COVID-19 test result, think about everyone you have been around recently. This will be important information to have available.  If your test is positive, someone from the health department may call you to check on your health, discuss who you have been around, and ask where you spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.

Follow your health department’s guidelines when you receive your COVID-19 test result.

Positive test, whether or not you have symptoms
If your test is positive, refer to the section What you can expect to happen if you are diagnosed with COVID-19
Negative test and you do not have symptoms
If your test is negative and you do not have symptoms, continue to stay away from others (self-quarantine) for 14 days after your last exposure to COVID-19 and follow all recommendations from the health department.
A negative result before the end of your quarantine period does not rule out possible infection.
You do not need a repeat test unless you develop symptoms.
Negative test and you have symptoms
If your test is negative and you have symptoms you should continue to stay away from others (self-quarantine) for 14 days after your last exposure to COVID-19 and follow all recommendations from the health department. A second test and additional medical consultation may be needed if your symptoms do not improve.
If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek emergency medical care.
The best way to protect yourself and others is to stay home for 14 days if you think you’ve been exposed to someone who has COVID-19. Check your local health department’s website for information about options in your area to possibly shorten this quarantine period.

If you are diagnosed with COVID-19
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you to Check on your health,
Discuss who you have been around, and
Ask where you have spent time while you may have been able to spread COVID-19 to others.
Discussions with health department staff are confidential. This means that your name and personal and medical information will be kept private and only shared with those who may need to know, like your health care provider.

Your name will not be shared with those you came in contact with. The health department will only notify people you were in close contact with (within 6 feet for a total of 15 minutes or more) that they might have been exposed to COVID-19.​

Stay home and away from others:

You will be asked to stay at home and self-isolate, if you are not doing so already.

Stay home and away from others except to get medical care.
Monitor your symptoms. If you have an emergency warning sign (including trouble breathing), seek emergency medical care immediately.
Stay in a separate room from other household members and use a separate bathroom, if possible.
Avoid contact with other household members and pets.
Don’t share personal household items, like cups, towels, and utensils.
Wear a mask when around other people, if able.
Learn more about what to do if you are sick.
Self-isolation helps slow the spread of COVID-19 and can help keep your family, friends, neighbors, and others healthy.
If you need support or assistance while in self-isolation, your health department or community organizations may be able to provide assistance.
Monitor your health: If your symptoms worsen or become severe, you should seek emergency medical care.

You can be around others after

10 days since symptoms first appeared and
24 hours with no fever without the use of fever-reducing medications, and
Other symptoms of COVID-19 are improving.

Tell your close contacts.

If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, tell your close contacts that they may have been exposed to COVID-19.
An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person has any symptoms or tests positive.
By letting your close contacts know they may have been exposed to COVID-19, you are helping to protect everyone.

***How COVID-19 Spreads

COVID-19 is thought to spread mainly through close contact from person to person, including between people who are physically near each other (within about 6 feet). People who are infected but do not show symptoms can also spread the virus to others. Cases of reinfection with COVID-19  have been reported but are rare. We are still learning about how the virus spreads and the severity of illness it causes.

COVID-19 spreads very easily from person to person
How easily a virus spreads from person to person can vary. The virus that causes COVID-19 appears to spread more efficiently than influenza but not as efficiently as measles, which is among the most contagious viruses known to affect people.

COVID-19 most commonly spreads during close contact
People who are physically near (within 6 feet) a person with COVID-19 or have direct contact with that person are at greatest risk of infection.
When people with COVID-19 cough, sneeze, sing, talk, or breathe they produce respiratory droplets. These droplets can range in size from larger droplets (some of which are visible) to smaller droplets. Small droplets can also form particles when they dry very quickly in the airstream.
Infections occur mainly through exposure to respiratory droplets when a person is in close contact with someone who has COVID-19.
Respiratory droplets cause infection when they are inhaled or deposited on mucous membranes, such as those that line the inside of the nose and mouth.
As the respiratory droplets travel further from the person with COVID-19, the concentration of these droplets decreases. Larger droplets fall out of the air due to gravity. Smaller droplets and particles spread apart in the air.
With passing time, the amount of infectious virus in respiratory droplets also decreases.
COVID-19 can sometimes be spread by airborne transmission
Some infections can be spread by exposure to virus in small droplets and particles that can linger in the air for minutes to hours. These viruses may be able to infect people who are further than 6 feet away from the person who is infected or after that person has left the space.
This kind of spread is referred to as airborne transmission and is an important way that infections like tuberculosis, measles, and chicken pox are spread.
There is evidence that under certain conditions, people with COVID-19 seem to have infected others who were more than 6 feet away. These transmissions occurred within enclosed spaces that had inadequate ventilation. Sometimes the infected person was breathing heavily, for example while singing or exercising.
Under these circumstances, scientists believe that the amount of infectious smaller droplet and particles produced by the people with COVID-19 became concentrated enough to spread the virus to other people. The people who were infected were in the same space during the same time or shortly after the person with COVID-19 had left.
Available data indicate that it is much more common for the virus that causes COVID-19 to spread through close contact with a person who has COVID-19 than through airborne transmission.

COVID-19 spreads less commonly through contact with contaminated surfaces
Respiratory droplets can also land on surfaces and objects. It is possible that a person could get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes.
Spread from touching surfaces is not thought to be a common way that COVID-19 spreads
COVID-19 rarely spreads between people and animals
It appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals in some situations. CDC is aware of a small number of pets worldwide, including cats and dogs, reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19. Learn what you should do if you have pets.
At this time, the risk of COVID-19 spreading from animals to people is considered to be low. Learn about COVID-19 and pets and other animals.
Protect yourself and others
The best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to this virus. You can take steps to slow the spread.

Stay at least 6 feet away from others, whenever possible. This is very important in preventing the spread of COVID-19.
Cover your mouth and nose with a mask when around others. This helps reduce the risk of spread both by close contact and by airborne transmission.
Wash your hands often with soap and water. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid crowded indoor spaces and ensure indoor spaces are properly ventilated by bringing in outdoor air as much as possible. In general, being outdoors and in spaces with good ventilation reduces the risk of exposure to infectious respiratory droplets.
Stay home and isolate from others when sick.
Routinely clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and take other steps to stop the spread at home.
Pandemics can be stressful, especially when you are staying away from others. During this time, it’s important to maintain social connections and care for your mental health.

***Reinfection with COVID-19
In general, reinfection means a person was infected (got sick) once, recovered, and then later became infected again. Based on what we know from similar viruses, some reinfections are expected. We are still learning more about COVID-19. Ongoing COVID-19 studies will help us understand:

How likely is reinfection
How often reinfection occurs
How soon after the first infection can reinfection take place
How severe are cases of reinfection
Who might be at higher risk for reinfection
What reinfection means for a person’s immunity
If a person is able to spread COVID-19 to other people when reinfected
What CDC is doing
CDC is actively working to learn more about reinfection to inform public health action. CDC developed recommendations for public health professionals to help decide when and how to test someone for suspected reinfection. CDC has also provided information for state and local health departments to help investigate suspected cases of reinfection. We will update this guidance as we learn more about reinfection.

Prevention
At this time, whether you have had COVID-19 or not, the best way to prevent infection is to take steps to protect yourself:

Wear a mask in public places
Stay at least 6 feet away from other people
Wash your hands
Avoid crowds and confined spaces

***About Variants of the Virus that Causes COVID-19​​

Information about the characteristics of these variants is rapidly emerging. Scientists are working to learn more about how easily they spread, whether they could cause more severe illness, and whether currently authorized vaccines will protect people against them.

What we know
Viruses constantly change through mutation, and new variants of a virus are expected to occur over time. Sometimes new variants emerge and disappear. Other times, new variants emerge and persist. Multiple variants of the virus that causes COVID-19 have been documented in the United States and globally during this pandemic.

The virus that causes COVID-19 is a type of coronavirus, a large family of viruses. Coronaviruses are named for the crown-like spikes on their surfaces. Scientists monitor changes in the virus, including changes to the spikes on the surface of the virus. These studies, including genetic analyses of the virus, are helping scientists understand how changes to the virus might affect how it spreads and what happens to people who are infected with it.

Multiple variants of the virus that causes COVID-19 are circulating globally:

The United Kingdom (UK) identified a variant called B.1.1.7 with a large number of mutations in the fall of 2020.
This variant spreads more easily and quickly than other variants. In January 2021, experts in the UK reported that this variant may be associated with an increased risk of death compared to other variant viruses, but more studies are needed to confirm this finding. It has since been detected in many countries around the world. This variant was first detected in the US at the end of December 2020.

In South Africa, another variant called B.1.351 emerged independently of B.1.1.7. Originally detected in early October 2020, B.1.351 shares some mutations with B.1.1.7. Cases caused by this variant have been reported in the US at the end of January 2021.
In Brazil, a variant called P.1 emerged that was first identified in travelers from Brazil, who were tested during routine screening at an airport in Japan, in early January. This variant contains a set of additional mutations that may affect its ability to be recognized by antibodies. This variant was first detected in the US at the end of January 2021.
These variants seem to spread more easily and quickly than other variants, which may lead to more cases of COVID-19. An increase in the number of cases will put more strain on health care resources, lead to more hospitalizations, and potentially more deaths.

So far, studies suggest that antibodies generated through vaccination with currently authorized vaccines recognize these variants. This is being closely investigated and more studies are underway.

Rigorous and increased compliance with public health mitigation strategies, such as vaccination, physical distancing, use of masks, hand hygiene, and isolation and quarantine, is essential to limit the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 and protect public health.

What we do not know
Scientists are working to learn more about these variants, and more studies are needed to understand:

How widely these new variants have spread
How the disease caused by these new variants differs from the disease caused by other variants that are currently circulating
How these variants may affect existing therapies, vaccines, and tests
What it means
Public health officials are studying these variants quickly to learn more to control their spread. They want to understand whether the variants:

Spread more easily from person-to-person
Cause milder or more severe disease in people
Are detected by currently available viral tests
Respond to medicines currently being used to treat people for COVID-19
Change the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines

***How to Protect Yourself & Others

Wear a mask
Everyone 2 and older should wear masks in public.
Masks should be worn in addition to staying at least 6 feet apart, especially around people who don’t live with you.
If someone in your household is infected, people in the household should take precautions including wearing masks to avoid spread to others.
Wash your hands or use hand sanitizer before putting on your mask.
Wear your mask over your nose and mouth and secure it under your chin.
Fit the mask snugly against the sides of your face, slipping the loops over your ears or tying the strings behind your head.
If you have to continually adjust your mask, it doesn’t fit properly, and you might need to find a different mask type or brand.
Make sure you can breathe easily.

Stay 6 feet away from others
Inside your home: Avoid close contact with people who are sick.
If possible, maintain 6 feet between the person who is sick and other household members.
Outside your home: Put 6 feet of distance between yourself and people who don’t live in your household.
Remember that some people without symptoms may be able to spread virus.
Stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other people.
Keeping distance from others is especially important for people who are at higher risk of getting very sick.

Avoid crowds
Being in crowds like in restaurants, bars, fitness centers, or movie theaters put you at higher risk for COVID-19.

Avoid poorly ventilated spaces
Avoid indoor spaces that do not offer fresh air from the outdoors as much as possible. If indoors, bring in fresh air by opening windows and doors, if possible.

Wash your hands often
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds especially after you have been in a public place, or after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing.
It’s especially important to wash:
Before eating or preparing food
Before touching your face
After using the restroom
After leaving a public place
After blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing
After handling your mask
After changing a diaper
After caring for someone sick
After touching animals or pets
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.

Cover coughs and sneezes
Always cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze or use the inside of your elbow and do not spit.
Throw used tissues in the trash.
Immediately wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not readily available, clean your hands with a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.

Clean and disinfect
Clean AND disinfect frequently touched surfaces daily. This includes tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks.
If surfaces are dirty, clean them. Use detergent or soap and water prior to disinfection.
Then, use a household disinfectant. Use products from EPA’s List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19) according to manufacturer’s labeled directions.

Monitor Your Health Daily
Be alert for symptoms. Watch for fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19.
Especially important if you are running essential errands, going into the office or workplace, and in settings where it may be difficult to keep a physical distance of 6 feet.
Take your temperature if symptoms develop.
Don’t take your temperature within 30 minutes of exercising or after taking medications that could lower your temperature, like acetaminophen.
Follow CDC guidance if symptoms develop.

Get Vaccinated to Protect Against COVID-19
COVID-19 vaccination is especially important for people who may be more likely to get very sick from COVID-19, such as older adults and people with certain medical conditions.
People with underlying medical conditions may get a COVID-19 vaccine as long as they have not had a severe or immediate allergic reaction to the first dose of aCOVID-19 vaccine or any of the ingredients in a COVID-19 vaccine. CDC has made recommendations on who should get vaccinated first.

***Your Guide to Masks
CDC recommends that people wear masks in public settings, at events and gatherings, and anywhere they will be around other people. Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.

***How to Wear Masks

Masks are a critical step to help prevent people from getting and spreading COVID-19. A cloth mask offers some protection to you as well as protecting those around you. Wear a mask and take every day preventive actions in public settings and mass transportation, at events and gatherings, and anywhere you will be around other people.

CDC recommends that people age 2 and older should wear masks in public. Masks should NOT be worn by children under age 2 or anyone who has trouble breathing.
Masks should be worn in addition to staying at least 6 feet apart, especially if indoors around people who don’t live with you.
If someone in your household is infected, people in the household should take precautions including wearing masks to avoid transmission to others.
Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​

CDC recommends that people age 2 and older should wear masks in public. Masks should NOT be worn by children under age 2 or anyone who has trouble breathing.
Masks should be worn in addition to staying at least 6 feet apart, especially if indoors around people who don’t live with you.
If someone in your household is infected, people in the household should take precautions including wearing masks to avoid transmission to others.
Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​

Wear a Mask to Prevent Getting and Spreading COVID-19

Dos
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth to help prevent getting and spreading COVID-19.
Wear a mask in public settings when around people who don’t live in your household, especially when indoors and when it may be difficult for you to stay six feet apart from people who don’t live with you.
Wear a mask correctly for maximum protection.
Wear your mask under your scarf, ski mask, or balaclava in cold weather
Keep a spare mask to replace one that becomes wet from moisture in your breath, snow, or rain.
Store wet reusable masks  in a plastic bag until they can be washed.

Don’ts
Put the mask around your neck or up on your forehead.
Touch the mask, and, if you do, wash your hands or use hand sanitizer.

To prevent getting and spreading COVID-19, follow these protective measures
Stay at least 6 feet away from others.
Avoid contact with people who are sick.
Wash your hands often, with soap and water, for at least 20 seconds each time.
Use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available.

Take Off Your Mask Carefully, When You’re Home
Untie the strings behind your head or stretch the ear loops
Handle only by the ear loops or ties
Fold outside corners together
Place mask in the washing machine (learn more about how to wash masks)
Be careful not to touch your eyes, nose, and mouth when removing and wash your hands immediately after removing.

Cold Weather
Change your mask when it becomes wet.
A wet mask is harder to breathe through, is less efficient at filtering, and vents more around the edges of the mask.
Keep a spare mask to replace one that becomes wet from moisture in your breath, snow, or rain.
Store your wet reusable mask in a plastic bag until you get home and can put it in the laundry.
If you need to wear a scarf, ski mask, or balaclava, wear it over your mask.
They are usually made of loosely knit fabrics not suitable for use as masks.
If you wear glasses, find a mask that fits closely over your nose or has a nose wire to help reduce fogging. Consider using an antifogging spray that is made for eyeglasses.

***How to Store and Wash Masks
Store your cloth mask properly and wash it regularly to keep it clean. Consider having more than one mask on hand so that you can easily replace a dirty mask with a clean one. Make sure to remove your mask correctly and wash your hands after touching a used mask.

Store your mask

Store wet or dirty masks in a plastic bag
If your mask is wet or dirty from sweat, saliva, make-up, or other liquids or substances, keep it in a sealed plastic bag until you can wash it. Wash wet or dirty masks as soon as possible to prevent them from becoming moldy. Wet masks can be hard to breathe through and are less effective than dry masks.

Store masks that are not wet or dirty in a paper bag
You can store your mask temporarily to reuse later. Remove your mask correctly and wash your hands after touching a used mask. Keep it in a dry, breathable bag (like a paper or mesh fabric bag) to keep it clean between uses. When reusing your mask, keep the same side facing out.

If you are taking off your mask to eat or drink outside of your home, you can place it somewhere safe to keep it clean, such as your pocket, purse, or paper bag. Make sure to wash or sanitize your hands after removing your mask. After eating, put the mask back on with the same side facing out. Be sure to wash or sanitize your hands again after putting your mask back on.

Wash your mask
Wash your cloth mask whenever it gets dirty or at least daily. If you have a disposable face mask, throw it away after wearing it once.

Using a washing machine
Include your mask with your regular laundry.
Use regular laundry detergent and the appropriate settings according to the fabric label.

By hand

Wash your mask with tap water and laundry detergent or soap.
Rinse thoroughly with clean water to remove detergent or soap.

Dry your mask
Dryer

Dry your mask completely in a warm or hot dryer

Air dry

Hang your mask in direct sunlight to dry completely. If you cannot hang it in direct sunlight, hang or lay it flat and let it dry completely.

***Improve How Your Mask Protects You

Correct and consistent mask use is a critical step everyone can take to prevent getting and spreading COVID-19. Masks work best when everyone wears them, but not all masks provide the same protection. When choosing a mask, look at how well it fits, how well it filters the air, and how many layers it has.

Two important ways to make sure your mask works the best it can

Make sure your mask fits snugly against your face. Gaps can let air with respiratory droplets leak in and out around the edges of the mask

Pick a mask with layers to keep your respiratory droplets in and others’ out. A mask with layers will stop more respiratory droplets getting inside your mask or escaping from your mask if you are sick.

Do
Choose a mask with a Nose Wire

A nose wire is a metal strip along the top of the mask
Nose wires prevent air from leaking out of the top of the mask.
Bend the nose wire over your nose to fit close to your face.

Use a Mask Fitter or Brace

Use a mask fitter or brace over a disposable mask or a cloth mask to prevent air from leaking around the edges of the mask.

Check that it Fits Snugly over your nose, mouth, and chin

Check for gaps by cupping your hands around the outside edges of the mask.
Make sure no air is flowing from the area near your eyes or from the sides of the mask.
If the mask has a good fit, you will feel warm air come through the front of the mask and may be able to see the mask material move in and out with each breath.

Add Layers of material

2 ways to layer

Use a cloth mask that has multiple layers of fabric.
Wear a disposable mask underneath a cloth mask.
The cloth mask should push the edges of the disposable mask against your face.
Make sure you can see and breathe easily

Knot and Tuck ear loops of a 3-ply mask

Knot the ear loops of a 3-ply face mask where they join the edge of the mask
Fold and tuck the unneeded material under the edges

Do NOT
Combine two disposable masks
Disposable masks are not designed to fit tightly and wearing more than one will not improve fit.
Combine a KN95 mask with any other mask.
Only use one KN95 mask at a time.

***Types of Masks
There are many types of masks you can use to protect yourself and others from getting and spreading COVID-19. When choosing a mask, choose one that fits snugly. Learn more about how to choose a mask that fits well and offers the best protection.

Cloth Masks

Cloth Masks can be made from a variety of fabrics, and many types of cloth masks are available.

Look for

Multiple layers of tightly woven, breathable fabric
Nose wire
Mask should block light when held up to bright light source

Do NOT wear

Masks with exhalation valves or vents
Single layer or masks made of thin fabric that don’t block light

When to wear

Anytime you are indoors or outdoors with people who don’t live with you.

2 Ways to have better fit and extra protection

Wear two masks (disposable mask underneath AND cloth mask on top)
Combine a cloth mask with a fitter or brace

Disposable Masks
Disposable face masks are widely available.

Look for:

A description indicating multiple layers of non-woven material
Nose wire  

Do NOT wear
Masks with gaps around the sides of the face or nose
If wet or dirty  

When to wear

Anytime you are indoors or outdoors with people you don’t live with.

Ways to have better fit and extra protection

Wear two masks (disposable mask underneath AND cloth mask on top)
A cloth mask can be combined with a fitter or brace
Knot and tuck ear loops of a 3-ply mask where they join the edge of the mask
Fold and tuck the unneeded material under the edges 

***How to Select and Use Hand Sanitizer

To prevent the spread of germs, including COVID-19, CDC recommends washing hands with soap and water whenever possible because it reduces the amount of many types of germs and chemicals on hands. But if soap and water are not readily available, using a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol can help you avoid getting sick and spreading germs to others.

Overview
Choose hand sanitizers that contain at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid alcohol-based hand sanitizers that are not approved by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) .
Properly apply alcohol-based sanitizer by rubbing the gel over all surfaces of your hands and fingers until your hands are dry.
Swallowing alcohol-based hand sanitizers can cause alcohol poisoning. Keep them out of reach of young children and supervise their use.

How to Select
Alcohol-based hand sanitizers come in all shapes and sizes with different ingredients. Which alcohol-based hand sanitizer do you choose? Check the product label and follow these do’s and don’ts.

When choosing an alcohol-based hand sanitizer

Do not wipe or bathe your pet with alcohol-based hand sanitizers. If your pet gets alcohol-based hand sanitizer on their skin or fur, rinse or wipe down your pet with water immediately.
If your pet ingests alcohol-based hand sanitizer (such as chewing the bottle) or is showing signs of illness after accidental exposure, contact your veterinarian or pet poison control immediately.

***When to Wear Gloves

For the general public, wearing gloves is not necessary in most situations, like running errands. CDC recommends wearing gloves when you are cleaning or caring for someone who is sick.
Practice everyday preventive actions like keeping social distance (at least 6 feet) from others, washing your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds (or using a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol), and wearing a mask when you have to go out in public.

When to use gloves
Cleaning with dish cloth while wearing gloves.
Use gloves when cleaning and disinfecting or providing care to someone who is sick
When cleaning
When you are routinely cleaning and disinfecting your home.

Follow precautions listed on the disinfectant product label, which may include-
Wearing gloves (reusable or disposable)
Having good ventilation by turning on a fan or opening a window to get fresh air into the room you’re cleaning
Wash your hands after you have removed the gloves.
When caring for someone who is sick
If you are providing care to someone who is sick at home or in another non-healthcare setting

Use disposable gloves when cleaning and disinfecting the area around the person who is sick or other surfaces that may be frequently touched in the home.
Use disposable gloves when touching or having contact with blood, stool, or body fluids, such as saliva, mucus, vomit, and urine.
After using disposable gloves, throw them out in a lined trash can. Do not disinfect or reuse the gloves.
Wash your hands after you have removed the gloves.

When gloves aren’t needed
Wearing gloves outside of these instances (for example, when using a shopping cart or using an ATM) will not necessarily protect you from getting COVID-19 and may still lead to the spread of germs.
The best way to protect yourself from germs when running errands and after going out is to regularly wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.

Protect yourself in other ways
COVID-19 is a respiratory virus and is mainly spread through droplets created when a person who is infected coughs, sneezes, or talks.

You can protect yourself by

Keeping social distance (at least 6 feet) from others
Washing your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds (or using a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol) at key times
Practicing everyday preventive actions

***Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home

What you need to know
Wear reusable or disposable gloves for routine cleaning and disinfection.
Clean surfaces using soap and water, then use disinfectant.
Clean or launder items according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for 20 seconds.
If someone is sick, keep a separate bedroom and bathroom for the person who is sick (if possible).

How to clean and disinfect

Wear disposable gloves to clean and disinfect and discard after use or use reusable gloves that are dedicated only for cleaning and disinfecting. Always wash hands after removing gloves.
Clean any dirty surfaces using soap and water first, then use disinfectant.
Clean or launder items according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for 20 seconds.
If someone is sick, keep a separate bedroom and bathroom for the person who is sick (if possible).
Disinfect with a household disinfectant on the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19).
Follow the instructions on the label to ensure safe and effective use of the product. Read EPA’s infographic on how to use these disinfectant products safely and effectively. Many products recommend:
Keeping surface wet with disinfectant for a period of time (see product label)
Precautions such as wearing gloves and making sure you have good ventilation while using the product

Use chemical disinfectants safely! Always read and follow the directions on the label of cleaning and disinfection products to ensure safe and effective use.

Wear gloves and consider glasses or goggles for potential splash hazards to eyes
Ensure adequate ventilation (for example, open windows)
Use only the amount recommended on the label
Use water at room temperature for dilution (unless stated otherwise on the label)
Label diluted cleaning solutions
Store and use chemicals out of the reach of children and pets
Do not mix products or chemicals
Do not eat, drink, breathe, or inject cleaning and disinfection products into your body or apply directly to your skin as they can cause serious harm
Do not wipe or bathe pets with any cleaning and disinfection products.
See EPA’s Six Steps for Safe and Effective Disinfectant Use.

Special considerations should be made for people with asthma. Some cleaning and disinfection products can trigger asthma. Learn more about reducing your chance of an asthma attack while disinfecting to prevent COVID-19.

If products on Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19)  are not available, bleach solutions can be used for many non-porous surfaces and will be effective against coronaviruses when properly diluted.

Most household bleach contains 5%–9% sodium hypochlorite. Do not use a bleach product if the percentage is not in this range or is not specified. This includes some types of laundry bleach or splashless bleach, which are not appropriate for disinfection.
Follow the directions on the bleach bottle for preparing a diluted bleach solution. If your bottle does not have directions, you can make a bleach solution by mixing:
5 tablespoons (1/3 cup) of bleach per gallon of room temperature water or
4 teaspoons of bleach per quart of room temperature water
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for the surface application. If instructions are not available, leave the diluted bleach solution on the surface for at least 1 minute before removing or wiping. This is known as the “contact time” for disinfection. The surface should remain visibly wet during the contact time.
Ensure proper ventilation during and after application (for example, open windows).
Never mix household bleach (or any disinfectants) with any other cleaners or disinfectants. This can release vapors that may be very dangerous to breathe in.
Make a new diluted bleach solution daily. Bleach solutions will not be as effective after being mixed with water for over 24 hours.

Soft (porous) surfaces
For soft surfaces such as carpet, rugs, and drapes.
Clean the surface using soap and water or with cleaners appropriate for use on these surfaces.
Launder items (if possible) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.

OR

Disinfect with a household disinfectant on EPA List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19).
Vacuum as usual. 

Electronics

For electronics, such as phones, tablets, touch screens, keyboards, and remote controls:

Consider putting a wipeable cover on electronics, which makes cleaning and disinfecting easier.
Follow manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations for cleaning.
For electronic surfaces that can be cleaned or disinfected, use a product on EPA List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19). Many of the products for electronics contain alcohol because it dries quickly.

Laundry
For clothing, towels, linens and other items that go in the laundry:

To minimize the possibility of dispersing the virus through the air, do not shake dirty laundry.
Wear disposable gloves when handling dirty laundry from a person who is sick.
Launder items according to the manufacturer’s instructions. If possible, use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
Dirty laundry from a person who is sick can be washed with other people’s items.
Clean and disinfect clothes hampers according to guidance above for surfaces.
Wash hands with soap and water or use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol after handling dirty laundry.

Clean hands often

Follow normal preventive actions while at work and home, including washing hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, and avoiding touching eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. It is especially important to wash hands:
After blowing one’s nose, coughing, or sneezing.
Before and after touching your eyes, nose, or mouth.
After using the restroom.
Before and after entering or leaving a public place.
Before and after touching your mask.
After changing a diaper.
Before eating or preparing food.
After touching animals or pets.
After caring for an ill person.

Hand sanitizer: If soap and water are not readily available and hands are not visibly dirty, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. However, if hands are visibly dirty, always wash hands with soap and water.

Always read and follow the directions on the label to ensure safe and effective use.
Keep hand sanitizers away from fire or flame.
Do not use hand sanitizer for children under six years of age without adult supervision.
Always store hand sanitizer out of reach of children and pets.
See CDC's Hand Sanitizer Use Considerations

HVAC, ventilation, and filtration
Ventilation and filtration provided by heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems can reduce the airborne concentration of the virus that causes COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2), which can reduce the risk of transmission through the air.

Check to be sure your HVAC filter is correctly in place and consider upgrading the filter to the highest-rated filter that your system can accommodate (consult your HVAC manual or an HVAC professional for details).
HVAC systems only filter the air when the fan is running, so run the system fan for longer times, or continuously. Many systems can be set to run the fan even when no heating or cooling is taking place.
When used properly, air purifiers can help reduce airborne contaminants, including viruses, in a home or confined space.
Improve ventilation with outside air to improve indoor air quality:
Open the windows, or screened doors, if possible.
Open the outdoor air intake or vent of your window air conditioner when in operation.
Operate a bathroom fan when the bathroom is in use or continuously, if possible.
Avoid these actions when outdoor air pollution is high or when it makes your home too cold, hot, or humid.
Care should be taken with portable ventilation equipment such as fans, to minimize air blowing from one person directly at another person to reduce the potential spread of any airborne or aerosolized viruses.
Running your HVAC system, using an air purifier or a portable air cleaner, and increasing ventilation are not enough to protect yourself and your family from COVID-19. Continue to follow other prevention guidelines.
Use of ozone generators in occupied spaces is not recommended. They do not effectively remove viruses, bacteria, mold, or other biological pollutants when operated at concentrations within public health standards.

When someone is sick

Bedroom and bathroom
Keep a separate bedroom and bathroom for a person who is sick (if possible).

The person who is sick should stay separated from other people in the home (as much as possible).
If you have a separate bedroom and bathroom: Wear disposable gloves and only clean the area around the person who is sick when needed, such as when the area is soiled. This will help limit your contact with the person who is sick.
Caregivers can provide personal cleaning supplies to the person who is sick (if appropriate). Supplies include tissues, paper towels, cleaners, and EPA List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19) . If they feel up to it, the person who is sick can clean their own space.
If you don’t have a separate bedroom and bathroom: The person who is sick should clean and disinfect after each use. If this is not possible, the caregiver should wait as long as possible before cleaning and disinfecting.
See precautions for household members and caregivers for more information.

Food
Eat separately: The person who is sick should eat (or be fed) in their room if possible.
Wash dishes and utensils using disposable gloves and hot water: Handle any used dishes, cups/glasses, or silverware with gloves. Wash them with soap and hot water or in a dishwasher.
Clean hands after taking off gloves or handling used items.

Trash
Dedicated, lined trash can: If possible, dedicate a lined trash can for the person who is sick. Use disposable gloves when removing garbage bags, and handling and disposing of trash. Wash hands afterwards.

***Improving Ventilation in Your Home
Staying home with only members of your household is the best way to keep SARS-CoV-2 (the virus that causes COVID-19) particles out of your home. However, if a visitor needs to be in your home, improving ventilation (air flow) can help prevent virus particles from accumulating in the air in your home. Good ventilation, along with other preventive actions, like staying 6 feet apart and wearing masks, can help prevent you from getting and spreading COVID-19.
Below are ways you can improve ventilation in your home. Use as many ways as you can (open windows, use air filters, and turn on fans) to help clear out virus particles in your home faster.

Bring as much fresh air into your home as possible.
Bringing fresh, outdoor air into your home helps keep virus particles from accumulating inside.

If it’s safe to do so, open doors and windows as much as you can to bring in fresh, outdoor air. While it’s better to open them wide, even having a window cracked open slightly can help.
If you can, open multiple doors and windows to allow more fresh air to move inside.
Do not open windows and doors if doing so is unsafe for you or others (for example, presence of young children and pets, risk of falling, triggering asthma symptoms, high levels of outdoor pollution).
If opening windows or doors is unsafe, consider other approaches for reducing virus particles in the air, such as using air filtration and bathroom and stove exhaust fans.

Filter the air in your home.
If your home has a central heating, ventilation and air conditioning system (HVAC, a system with air ducts that go throughout the home) that has a filter, do the following to help trap virus particles:

In homes where the HVAC fan operation can be controlled by a thermostat, set the fan to the “on” position instead of “auto” when you have visitors. This allows the fan to run continuously, even if heating or air conditioning is not on.
Use pleated filters — they are more efficient than ordinary furnace filters and can be found in hardware stores. They should be installed initially within the HVAC system by a professional, if possible. If that is not possible, carefully follow the manufacturer’s instructions to replace the filter yourself.
Make sure the filter fits properly in the unit.
Change your filter every three months or according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Ideally, have the ventilation system inspected and adjusted by a professional every year to make sure it is operating efficiently.

Consider using a portable air cleaner.
If you don’t have an HVAC system or just want extra filtration, consider using a portable high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) cleaner.  They are the most efficient filters on the market for trapping particles that people exhale when breathing, talking, singing, coughing, and sneezing.

When choosing a HEPA cleaner, select one that is the right size for the room(s). One way to do this is to select a HEPA fan system with a Clean Air Delivery Rate (CADR) that meets or exceeds the square footage of the room in which it will be used. The larger the CADR, the faster it will clean the air. See EPA’s Guide to Air Cleaners in the Home  for more information.

Turn on the exhaust fan in your bathroom and kitchen.
Exhaust fans above your stovetop and in your bathroom that vent outdoors can help move air outside.  Although some stove exhaust fans don’t send the air to the outside, they can still improve air flow and keep virus particles from being concentrated in one place.

Keep the exhaust fan turned on over your stovetop and in your bathroom if you have visitors in your home.
Keep the exhaust fans turned on for an hour after your visitors leave to help remove virus particles that might be in the air.

Use fans to improve air flow.
Place a fan as close as possible to an open window blowing outside. This helps get rid of virus particles in your home by blowing air outside. Even without an open window, fans can improve air flow.
Point fans away from people. Pointing fans toward people can possibly cause contaminated air to flow directly at them.
Use ceiling fans to help improve air flow in the home whether or not windows are open.

Limit the number of visitors in your home and the time spent inside.
The more people inside your home, and the longer they stay, the more virus particles can accumulate.

Limit the number of visitors in your home.
Try to gather in larger rooms or areas where you can stay at least 6 feet apart.
Be sure that everyone wears a mask while visitors are in your home. This includes the visitors as well as the people who usually live in your home.
Keep visits as short as possible.
Follow additional recommendations for hosting gatherings.

***Protect your Home from COVID-19

COVID-19 can spread anywhere, even places where you feel safe, like your home. If even one person in your household gets COVID-19, it can spread to others in your home. Learn what you can do to keep COVID-19 outside your home, and if it gets in your home, what you can do to keep it from spreading.

What is a household?
Anyone who currently lives in and shares common spaces in your housing unit (house or apartment)
Households can include family members and or people who aren’t related to you, like roommates
People who don’t currently live with you (for example, college students who return home from school on breaks) are part of different households

Keep COVID-19 Outside Your Home
When you leave your house for work, to run errands, or for any other reason, you have a chance of being exposed to COVID-19 and bringing it back to your home.

The chances of being exposed increase when you

Have close contact with other people (closer than 6 feet)
Spend more time with other people
Spend time in crowds (more than 10 people)
Spend time in indoor spaces, particularly if poorly ventilated
Keep COVID-19 outside your home! When around people who don’t live in your home, wear a mask, wash your hands, and stay at least 6 feet apart to protect yourself and prevent bringing COVID-19 into your home.

Wear a Mask
Wash your hands before putting on your mask.
Wear your mask over your nose and mouth and secure it under your chin.
Fit your mask snugly against the sides of your face.
Make sure you can breathe easily.
When you take off your mask, handle it only by the ear loops or ties.
Store your used mask safely to keep it clean between uses.
Wash your cloth mask regularly, preferably in a washing machine.

Stay at least 6 Feet Apart and Avoid Crowds
Stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other people. Remember that people can spread the virus even if they don’t have symptoms.
Avoid crowds and indoor spaces as much as possible, particularly ones that aren’t well ventilated
The more people you are in contact with, the more likely you are to be exposed to COVID-19.

Wash Your Hands
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water aren’t available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth until after you wash your hands.

Prevent COVID-19 Inside Your Home
If your household includes one or more people who are more likely to get very sick from COVID-19 then all household members should act as if they are more likely to get very sick. Learn how to protect yourself and others.

If you aren’t able to take steps to keep COVID-19 outside your home, then stop it from spreading  inside your home, especially if you have someone at home who is more likely to get very sick from COVID-19. Take these steps to protect people in your household.

Wear a mask in shared spaces around others
If you or others in your household are in close contact (within 6 feet) of other people who don’t live in your household and if you have household members who are more likely to get very sick from COVID-19 (older adults, people with specific medical conditions or who have to take extra precautions), consider wearing masks in shared spaces around others in your home.
Stay at least 6 feet apart
In shared spaces, stay about 2 arm lengths apart. Remember that people can spread the virus even if they don’t have symptoms.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds
Use hand sanitizer if soap and water aren’t available.
Monitor your health daily
Watch for fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19.
Clean and disinfect high-touch surfaces in shared spaces
Avoid sharing personal household items
Do not share items such as dishes, drinking glasses, cups, eating utensils, or towels with other people in your home.
Wash these items thoroughly after using them.

If Someone Gets Sick
Separate the person who is sick from other people in your home, if possible.
People in the household should stay separated from the person who is sick. If they must be around the person who is sick, they should wear a mask.
The person who is sick should
Stay in a separate room and away from other people and pets
Use a separate bathroom
Wear a mask around others
Be sure the person who is sick
Covers their mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing or sneezing
Throws away used tissues in a lined trashcan. Washes their hands often.
Does not prepare, serve, or assist in preparing or serving, food to others.

***Social Distancing

Limiting close face-to-face contact with others is the best way to reduce the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).

What is social distancing?

Social distancing, also called “physical distancing,” means keeping a safe space between yourself and other people who are not from your household.

To practice social or physical distancing, stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other people who are not from your household in both indoor and outdoor spaces.

Social distancing should be practiced in combination with other everyday preventive actions to reduce the spread of COVID-19, including wearing masks, avoiding touching your face with unwashed hands, and frequently washing your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.

Why practice social distancing?
COVID-19 spreads mainly among people who are in close contact (within about 6 feet) for a prolonged period. Spread happens when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks, and droplets from their mouth or nose are launched into the air and land in the mouths or noses of people nearby. The droplets can also be inhaled into the lungs. Recent studies indicate that people who are infected but do not have symptoms likely also play a role in the spread of COVID-19. Since people can spread the virus before they know they are sick, it is important to stay at least 6 feet away from others when possible, even if you—or they—do not have any symptoms. Social distancing is especially important for people who are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19.

If you are sick with COVID-19, have symptoms consistent with COVID-19, or have been in close contact with someone who has COVID-19, it is important to stay home and away from other people until it is safe to be around others.

COVID-19 can live for hours or days on a surface, depending on factors such as sunlight, humidity, and the type of surface. It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes. However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads. Social distancing helps limit opportunities to come in contact with contaminated surfaces and infected people outside the home.

Although the risk of severe illness may be different for everyone, anyone can get and spread COVID-19. Everyone has a role to play in slowing the spread and protecting themselves, their family, and their community. In addition to practicing everyday steps to prevent COVID-19, keeping space between you and others is one of the best tools we have to avoid being exposed to this virus and slowing its spread in communities.

Tips for Social Distancing
When going out in public, it is important to stay at least 6 feet away from other people and wear a mask to slow the spread of COVID-19. Consider the following tips for practicing social distancing when you decide to go out.

Know Before You Go: Before going out, know and follow the guidance from local public health authorities where you live.
Prepare for Transportation: Consider social distancing options to travel safely when running errands or commuting to and from work, whether walking, bicycling, wheelchair rolling, or using public transit, rideshares, or taxis. When using public transit, try to keep at least 6 feet from other passengers or transit operators – for example, when you are waiting at a bus station or selecting seats on a bus or train. When using rideshares or taxis, avoid pooled rides where multiple passengers are picked up, and sit in the back seat in larger vehicles so you can remain at least 6 feet away from the driver. Follow these additional tips to protect yourself while using transportation.
Limit Contact When Running Errands: Only visit stores selling household essentials in person when you absolutely need to, and stay at least 6 feet away from others who are not from your household while shopping and in lines. If possible, use drive-thru, curbside pick-up, or delivery services to limit face-to-face contact with others. Maintain physical distance between yourself and delivery service providers during exchanges and wear a mask.
Choose Safe Social Activities:It is possible to stay socially connected with friends and family who don’t live in your home by calling, using video chat, or staying connected through social media. If meeting others in person (e.g., at small outdoor gatherings, yard or driveway gathering with a small group of friends or family members), stay at least 6 feet from others who are not from your household. Follow these steps to stay safe if you will be participating in personal and social activities outside of your home.
Keep Distance at Events and Gatherings: It is safest to avoid crowded places and gatherings where it may be difficult to stay at least 6 feet away from others who are not from your household. If you are in a crowded space, try to keep 6 feet of space between yourself and others at all times, and wear a mask. Masks are especially important in times when physical distancing is difficult. Pay attention to any physical guides, such as tape markings on floors or signs on walls, directing attendees to remain at least 6 feet apart from each other in lines or at other times. Allow other people 6 feet of space when you pass by them in both indoor and outdoor settings.
Stay Distanced While Being Active: Consider going for a walk, bike ride, or wheelchair roll in your neighborhood or in another safe location where you can maintain at least 6 feet of distance between yourself and other pedestrians and cyclists. If you decide to visit a nearby park, trail, or recreational facility, first check for closures or restrictions. If open, consider how many other people might be there and choose a location where it will be possible to keep at least 6 feet of space between yourself and other people who are not from your household.
Many people have personal circumstances or situations that present challenges with practicing social distancing to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Please see the following guidance for additional recommendations and considerations:

Households Living in Close Quarters: How to Protect Those Who Are Most Vulnerable
Living in Shared Housing
People with Disabilities
People Experiencing Homelessness

***Household Checklist

Household Checklist

Stay informed and in touch
Get up-to-date information about local COVID-19 activity from public health officials.
Create a list of local organizations you and your household can contact in case you need access to information, healthcare services, support, and resources.
Create an emergency contact list including family, friends, neighbors, carpool drivers, healthcare providers, teachers, employers, the local public health department, and other community resources.

Prepare for possible illness
Consider members of the household who may have an increased risk for severe illness.
Choose a room in your house that can be used to separate sick household members from others.

Those at higher risk for severe illness
Take additional precautions for those at higher risk for severe illness, particularly older adults and those of any age who have severe underlying health conditions.

Take everyday preventive actions
Wash your hands frequently.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
Stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other people.
Stay home when you are sick.
Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue, then throw the tissue in the trash.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces.
Wear a mask when you go out in public.
Masks should not be placed on young children under age 2, anyone who has trouble breathing, or is unconscious, incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance.

If you have a fever, cough or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19. Most people have mild illness and are able to recover at home. If you think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider.

Keep track of your symptoms.
If you have an emergency warning sign (including trouble breathing), get emergency medical care immediately.

If someone in your home is sick
How to care for a sick household member.
What to do if you are sick.
How to decide if others in the home should quarantine.
Continue to practice everyday preventive actions.

Generations in the household
Those who are at an increased risk for severe illness: take additional precautions. Make sure you have access to several weeks of medications and supplies in case you need to stay home. Stay at home if possible.
Children: How to keep kids healthy. Notify your child’s school or daycare if your child becomes sick with COVID-19.
Take care of the emotional health of your household members, including yourself.

Pets in the household
Treat pets as you would other human family members – do not let pets interact with people outside the household.

***Households Living in Close Quarters

This guidance is intended for people living together in close quarters, such as people who share a small apartment, or for people who live in the same household with large or extended families.

People of any age who have certain underlying medical conditions are at risk for getting COVID-19. Some groups have an increased risk for severe illness from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The following information is aimed to help you protect those who are most vulnerable in your household.

Everyone should limit risks
If your household includes one or more vulnerable individuals then all family members should act as if they, themselves, are at higher risk. Learn how to protect yourself and others.

Limit errands
Family members should leave only when absolutely necessary. Essential errands include going to the grocery store, pharmacy, or medical appointments that cannot be delayed (e.g., infants or individuals with serious health conditions in need of aid).
If you must leave the house, please do the following:

Choose one or two family members who are not at a higher risk to run the essential errands.
Wear a mask, avoid crowds, practice social distancing, and follow these recommended tips for running errands.
If feasible, use forms of transportation that minimize close contact with others (e.g., biking, walking, driving or riding by car either alone or with household members).
If necessary to use public transportation:
Maintain a 6-foot distance from other passengers as much as possible.
Avoid touching high-touch surfaces such as handrails, and wash hands or use hand sanitizers as soon as possible after leaving.
Follow CDC guidance on how to protect yourself when using transportation.
Try to commute during less busy times.
Clean your hands as soon as possible after the trip.
If necessary to ride in a car with members of different households:
Limit close contact and create space between others in the vehicle as possible.
Improve air flow in the car by opening the window or placing air conditioning on non-recirculation mode.
Wash your hands immediately after you return home.
Maintain as much physical distance as possible with those at higher risk in the home. For example, avoid hugging, kissing, or sharing food or drinks.

Vulnerable members should avoid caring for children and those who are sick
Those who are at increased risk for severe illness should avoid caring for the children in their household, if possible. If people at higher risk must care for the children in their household, the children in their care should not have contact with individuals outside the household. Members of the household who are at high risk should also avoid taking care of sick people of any age who are sick.

Separate a household member who is sick
Provide a separate bedroom and bathroom for the person who is sick, if possible. If you cannot provide a separate room and bathroom, try to separate them from other household members as much as possible. Keep people at higher risk separated from anyone who is sick.

If possible, have only one person in the household take care of the person who is sick. This caregiver should be someone who is not at higher risk for severe illness and should minimize contact with other people in the household.
Identify a different caregiver for other members of the household who require help with cleaning, bathing, or other daily tasks.
If possible, maintain 6 feet between the person who is sick and other family or household members.
If you need to share a bedroom with someone who is sick, make sure the room has good air flow.
Open the window and turn on a fan to bring in and circulate fresh air if possible.
Maintain at least 6 feet between beds if possible.
Sleep head to toe.
Put a curtain around or place other physical divider (e.g., shower curtain, room screen divider, large cardboard poster board, quilt, or large bedspread) to separate the ill person’s bed.
If you need to share a bathroom with someone who is sick, the person who is sick should clean and disinfect the frequently touched surfaces in the bathroom after each use. If this is not possible, the person who does the cleaning should:
Open outside doors and windows before entering and use ventilating fans to increase air circulation in the area.
Wait as long as possible before entering the room to clean and disinfect or to use the bathroom.
If you are sick, do not help prepare food. Also, eat separately from the family.

***Living in Shared Housing

Shared or congregate housing includes apartments, condominiums, student or faculty housing, national and state park staff housing, transitional housing, and domestic violence and abuse shelters.

Shared housing residents often gather together closely for social, leisure, and recreational activities, shared dining, laundry facilities, stairwells, and elevators and may have challenges with social distancing to prevent the spread of COVID-19.

Protect yourself
Social distance by staying at least 6 feet apart from others that you do not live with.
CDC recommends that people wear masks in public settings when around people who don’t live in your household, especially when other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Seek out a “buddy” in the facility who will check on you and make sure you are getting basic necessities, including food and household essentials.

People at-risk
Keep up-to-date lists of medical conditions and medications, and periodically check to ensure you have a sufficient supply of your prescription and over-the-counter medications.
Contact your healthcare provider to ask about getting extra necessary medications to have on hand for a longer period of time, or to consider using a mail-order option for medications.
Be aware of serious symptoms of if you have underlying conditions, of COVID-19 symptoms, and know who to ask for help or when to call 911.

Know where to get information
Make sure you know how your facility is going to communicate COVID-19 information to you; email, websites, hotlines, automated text messaging, newsletters, and flyers to help communicate information on.

The facility
COVID-19 prevention supplies should be provided in common areas, such as soap, alcohol-based hand sanitizers that contain at least 60% alcohol, tissues, trash baskets, and, if possible, masks that are washed or discarded after each use.
Non-essential volunteers and visitors in shared areas should be limited or avoided.
Staff should avoid entering residents’ rooms or living quarters unless it is necessary. Staff should use virtual communications and check ins (phone or video chat), as appropriate.

Common spaces
Be flexible, rules may change in common areas. Maintain 6 feet of social (physical) distance between yourself and everyone that you do not live with. This may mean there will be alternatives to activities, cancelled activities, or closed areas. If you see people in areas that are small, like stairwells and elevators, consider going one at a time. Here are some examples of how the rules in common spaces may change:

Shared kitchens, dining rooms, laundry rooms, bathrooms
Access should be available, but the number of people should be restricted so that everyone can stay at least 6 feet apart from one another.
People who are sick, their roommates, and those who have higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19 should eat or be fed in their room, if possible.
Do not share dishes, drinking glasses, cups, or eating utensils. Non-disposable food service items used should be handled with gloves and washed with dish soap and hot water or in a dishwasher.
Guidelines for doing laundry such as washing instructions and handling of dirty laundry should be posted.
Sinks could be an infection source and should avoid placing toothbrushes directly on counter surfaces. Totes can be used for personal items so they do not touch the bathroom countertop.

Recreational areas such as activity rooms, exercise rooms, pools, and hot tubs
Consider closing or restricting the number of people allowed in at one time to ensure everyone can stay at least 6 feet apart, except for essential activities only, such as water therapy.
Considerations for operators of pools and other aquatic venues

If a resident has or thinks they have COVID-19

Administrators
Residents are not required to notify administrators if they think they may or have a confirmed case of COVID-19. If administrators do receive information that someone in your facility has COVID-19, they should work with the local health department  to notify anyone in the building who may have been exposed (had close contact with the sick person) while maintaining the confidentiality of the sick person as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and, if applicable, the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA).

If possible, designate a separate bathroom for residents with COVID-19 symptoms.
Consider reducing cleaning frequency in bedrooms and bathrooms dedicated to persons with COVID-19 symptoms to as-needed cleaning (e.g., soiled items and surfaces) to avoid unnecessary contact with the ill persons.

Sick person and close contacts
The sick person, their roommates, and close contacts need to self-isolate – limit their use of shared spaces as much as possible. They should:

Wear a mask when it is necessary to be in shared spaces.
Avoid using public transportation, ride-sharing, or taxis.
What to do if you are sick
Isolate if you are sick
Caring for someone sick at home
Cases of reinfection with COVID-19 have been reported but are rare.

***What to Do If You Are Sick

@If you have a fever, cough or other symptoms, you might have COVID-19. 
Most people have mild illness and are able to recover at home. If you think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider.

Keep track of your symptoms.
If you have an emergency warning sign (including trouble breathing), get emergency medical care immediately.

@Steps to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 if you are sick
If you are sick with COVID-19 or think you might have COVID-19, follow the steps below to care for yourself and to help protect other people in your home and community.


@Stay home except to get medical care
Stay home. Most people with COVID-19 have mild illness and can recover at home without medical care. Do not leave your home, except to get medical care. Do not visit public areas.

@Take care of yourself. 
Get rest and stay hydrated. Take over-the-counter medicines, such as acetaminophen, to help you feel better.

@Stay in touch with your doctor. 
Call before you get medical care. Be sure to get care if you have trouble breathing, or have any other emergency warning signs, or if you think it is an emergency.

@Avoid public transportation.
This includes ride-sharing, or taxis.

@Separate yourself from other people.
Stay in a specific room.
If possible be away from other people and pets in your home. If possible, you should use a separate bathroom. If you need to be around other people or animals in or outside of the home, wear a mask.

Tell your close contacts that they may have been exposed to COVID-19. An infected person can spread COVID-19 starting 48 hours (or 2 days) before the person has any symptoms or tests positive. By letting your close contacts know they may have been exposed to COVID-19, you are helping to protect everyone.

@Additional guidance is available for those living in close quarters and shared housing.

@See COVID-19 and Animals if you have questions about pets.
If you are diagnosed with COVID-19, someone from the health department may call you. Answer the call to slow the spread.

@Monitor your symptoms.
Symptoms of COVID-19 include fever, cough, or other symptoms.
Follow care instructions from your healthcare provider and local health department. Your local health authorities may give instructions on checking your symptoms and reporting information.

When to seek emergency medical attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19. If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately:

@Trouble breathing
Persistent pain or pressure in the chest
New confusion
Inability to wake or stay awake
Pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone
*This list is not all possible symptoms. Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.

Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.

@Call ahead before visiting your doctor.
Call ahead. Many medical visits for routine care are being postponed or done by phone or telemedicine.
If you have a medical appointment that cannot be postponed, call your doctor’s office, and tell them you have or may have COVID-19. This will help the office protect themselves and other patients.

@If you are sick

@Wear a mask over your nose and mouth.
You should wear a mask over your nose and mouth if you must be around other people or animals, including pets (even at home).
You don’t need to wear the mask if you are alone. If you can’t put on a mask (because of trouble breathing, for example), cover your coughs and sneezes in some other way. Try to stay at least 6 feet away from other people. This will help protect the people around you.
Masks should not be placed on young children under age 2 years, anyone who has trouble breathing, or anyone who is not able to remove the mask without help.

@Note: During the COVID-19 pandemic, medical grade facemasks are reserved for healthcare workers and some first responders.

@Cover your coughs and sneezes.
Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze.
Throw away used tissues in a lined trash can.
Immediately wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, clean your hands with an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.

@Clean your hands often

@Wash your hands.
Soap and water are recommended for at least 20 seconds. This is especially important after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing; going to the bathroom; and before eating or preparing food.

@Use hand sanitizer.
if soap and water are not available. Use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, covering all surfaces of your hands and rubbing them together until they feel dry.
Soap and water are the best option, especially if hands are visibly dirty.

@Avoid touching your eyes.
Also avoid touching your nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
Handwashing Tips

@Avoid sharing personal household items.
Do not share dishes, drinking glasses, cups, eating utensils, towels, or bedding with other people in your home.
Wash these items thoroughly after using them with soap and water or put in the dishwasher.

@Clean all high-touch surfaces everyday.
Clean and disinfect high-touch surfaces in your “sick room” and bathroom; wear disposable gloves. Let someone else clean and disinfect surfaces in common areas, but you should clean your bedroom and bathroom, if possible.
If a caregiver or other person needs to clean and disinfect a sick person’s bedroom or bathroom, they should do so on an as-needed basis. The caregiver/other person should wear a mask and disposable gloves prior to cleaning. They should wait as long as possible after the person who is sick has used the bathroom before coming in to clean and use the bathroom.

@Clean and disinfect areas that may have blood, stool, or body fluids on them.

@Use household cleaners and disinfectants. 
Clean the area or item with soap and water or another detergent if it is dirty. Then, use a household disinfectant.
Be sure to follow the instructions on the label to ensure safe and effective use of the product.

@Many products recommend keeping the surface wet for several minutes to ensure germs are killed.
Many also recommend precautions such as wearing gloves and making sure you have good ventilation during use of the product.

***Isolate If You Are Sick
Isolation is used to separate people infected with COVID-19 from those who are not infected.

People who are in isolation should stay home until it’s safe for them to be around others. At home, anyone sick or infected should separate from others, stay in a specific “sick room” or area, and use a separate bathroom (if available).

Who needs to isolate?
People who have COVID-19

People who have symptoms of COVID-19 and are able to recover at home
People who don’t have symptoms but have tested positive for COVID-19​​

Steps to take
Stay home except to get medical care

Monitor your symptoms. If you have an emergency warning sign (including trouble breathing), seek emergency medical care immediately
Stay in a separate room from other household members, if possible
Use a separate bathroom, if possible
Avoid contact with other members of the household and pets
Don’t share personal household items, like cups, towels, and utensils

Confirmed and suspected cases of reinfection of the virus that causes COVID-19
Cases of reinfection of COVID-19 have been reported but are rare. In general, reinfection means a person was infected (got sick) once, recovered, and then later became infected again. Based on what we know from similar viruses, some reinfections are expected.

When you can be around others after you had or likely had COVID-19
When you can be around others (end home isolation) depends on different factors for different situations.

Find CDC’s recommendations for your situation below.

I think or know I had COVID-19, and I had symptoms
You can be with others after

At least 10 days since symptoms first appeared and
At least 24 hours with no fever without fever-reducing medication and
Other symptoms of COVID-19 are improving
**Loss of taste and smell may persist for weeks or months after recovery and need not delay the end of isolation​

If you had severe illness from COVID-19 (you were admitted to a hospital and needed oxygen), your healthcare provider may recommend that you stay in isolation for longer than 10 days after your symptoms first appeared (possibly up to 20 days) and you may need to finish your period of isolation at home.

I tested positive for COVID-19 but had no symptoms
If you continue to have no symptoms, you can be with others after:

10 days have passed since the date you had your positive test
If you develop symptoms after testing positive, follow the guidance above for “I think or know I had COVID, and I had symptoms.”

I had COVID-19 or I tested positive for COVID-19 and I have a weakened immune system
If you have a weakened immune system (immunocompromised) due to a health condition or medication, you might need to stay home and isolate longer than 10 days and possibly 20 days after symptoms begin. In some circumstances, further testing may be needed. Talk to your healthcare provider for more information.

Your doctor may work with an infectious disease expert or your local health department to determine when you can be around others.

Getting testing again for COVID-19
If you have recovered from your symptoms after testing positive for COVID-19, you may continue to test positive for three months or more without being contagious to others. For this reason, you should be tested only if you develop new symptoms of possible COVID-19. Getting tested again should be discussed with your healthcare provider, especially if you have been in close contact with another person who has tested positive for COVID-19 in the last 14 days.

If you have symptoms and test positive for COVID-19, follow the guidance above for “I think or know I had COVID, and I had symptoms.” Your doctor may work with an infectious disease expert at your local health department to determine when you can be around others.

***When to Quarantine

Local public health authorities determine and establish the quarantine options for their jurisdictions. Quarantine is used to keep someone who might have been exposed to COVID-19 away from others. Quarantine helps prevent spread of disease that can occur before a person knows they are sick or if they are infected with the virus without feeling symptoms. People in quarantine should stay home, separate themselves from others, monitor their health, and follow directions from their state or local health department.

Who needs to quarantine?
People who have been in close contact with someone who has COVID-19—excluding people who have had COVID-19 within the past 3 months.

People who have tested positive for COVID-19 within the past 3 months and recovered do not have to quarantine or get tested again as long as they do not develop new symptoms.
People who develop symptoms again within 3 months of their first bout of COVID-19 may need to be tested again if there is no other cause identified for their symptoms.
People who have been in close contact with someone who has COVID-19 are not required to quarantine if they have been fully vaccinated against the disease within the last three months and show no symptoms.
What counts as close contact?

You were within 6 feet of someone who has COVID-19 for a total of 15 minutes or more
You provided care at home to someone who is sick with COVID-19
You had direct physical contact with the person (hugged or kissed them)
You shared eating or drinking utensils
They sneezed, coughed, or somehow got respiratory droplets on you
Steps to take
Stay home and monitor your health

Stay home for 14 days after your last contact with a person who has COVID-19.
Watch for fever (100.4◦F), cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19
If possible, stay away from others, especially people who are at higher risk for getting very sick from COVID-19

Options to reduce quarantine
Reducing the length of quarantine may make it easier for people to quarantine by reducing the time they cannot work. A shorter quarantine period also can lessen stress on the public health system, especially when new infections are rapidly rising.

Your local public health authorities make the final decisions about how long quarantine should last, based on local conditions and needs. Follow the recommendations of your local public health department if you need to quarantine. Options they will consider include stopping quarantine

After day 10 without testing
After day 7 after receiving a negative test result (test must occur on day 5 or later)
After stopping quarantine, you should

Watch for symptoms until 14 days after exposure.
If you have symptoms, immediately self-isolate and contact your local public health authority or healthcare provider.
Wear a mask, stay at least 6 feet from others, wash your hands, avoid crowds, and take other steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
CDC continues to endorse quarantine for 14 days and recognizes that any quarantine shorter than 14 days balances reduced burden against a small possibility of spreading the virus. CDC will continue to evaluate new information and update recommendations as needed. See Options to Reduce Quarantine for Contacts of Persons with SARS-CoV-2 Infection Using Symptom Monitoring and Diagnostic Testing for guidance on options to reduce quarantine.

Confirmed and suspected cases of reinfection of the virus that causes COVID-19
Cases of reinfection of COVID-19 have been reported but are rare. In general, reinfection means a person was infected (got sick) once, recovered, and then later became infected again. Based on what we know from similar viruses, some reinfections are expected.

***Caring for Someone Sick at Home

If you are caring for someone with COVID-19 at home or in a non-healthcare setting, follow this advice to protect yourself and others. Learn what to do when someone has symptoms of COVID-19 or when someone has been diagnosed with the virus. This information also should be followed when caring for people who have tested positive but are not showing symptoms.

*Note: Older adults and people of any age with serious underlying medical conditions are at higher risk for developing more severe illness from COVID-19. People at higher risk of severe illness should call their doctor as soon as symptoms start.

Provide support

Help cover basic needs

Help the person who is sick follow their doctor’s instructions for care and medicine.
For most people, symptoms last a few days, and people usually feel better after a week.
See if over-the-counter medicines for fever help the person feel better.
Make sure the person who is sick drinks a lot of fluids and rests.
Help them with grocery shopping, filling prescriptions, and getting other items they may need. Consider having the items delivered through a delivery service, if possible.
Take care of their pet(s), and limit contact between the person who is sick and their pet(s) when possible.

Watch for warning signs
Have their doctor’s phone number on hand.
Use CDC’s self-checker tool to help you make decisions about seeking appropriate medical care.
Call their doctor if the person keeps getting sicker. For medical emergencies, call 911 and tell the dispatcher that the person has or might have COVID-19.

When to seek emergency medical attention
Look for emergency warning signs* for COVID-19. If someone is showing any of these signs, seek emergency medical care immediately:

Trouble breathing
Persistent pain or pressure in the chest
New confusion
Inability to wake or stay awake
Pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone
*This list is not all possible symptoms. Please call your medical provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.

Call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility: Notify the operator that you are seeking care for someone who has or may have COVID-19.

***Sick Parents and Caregivers

If a parent or a sole caregiver has COVID-19
Everyone in the home should practice everyday preventive actions. Those in the home who are sick with COVID-19 should follow CDC’s guidance for what to do if you are sick and when it is safe to end your isolation.

If a child’s parent or caregiver is sick with COVID-19, follow the steps below to help protect the child from infection.

Older children
The child should avoid physical contact with the sick parent or caregiver until all sick people have ended their home isolation. For the child to safely have no interaction with the parent or caregiver, the child should be old enough to legally be home alone and mature enough to care for themselves.

Younger children
If the parent or sole caregiver will be caring for the child while sick, they should contact the child’s healthcare provider for advice on how to best protect the child from infection.

Young children should be supervised at all times.
If the parent or the sole caregiver is too ill to care for the child, they should see if there is a caregiver outside of the home with whom the child can stay. The caregiver should not be someone who is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, as the child has likely been exposed to the virus. The caregiver will need to help the child quarantine for 14 days since they last had close contact (within 6 feet way from someone for a total of 15 minutes or more) with the sick person.

Children staying in the home with the sick parent or caregiver

If a child needs to stay in the home with you (the parent or caregiver who is sick):

Both you and the child should wear a mask while in the same room.
Note that masks should not be placed on:
Children younger than 2 years old
Anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious
Anyone who is incapacitated or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance
Wash your hands frequently with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol and rub your hands together until they are dry.
Try to stay 6 feet away from the child, if possible and if safe.
Increase ventilation by opening a window in a room that you are in.
Disinfect any items that you need to bring to the child.
Do not disinfect food that you bring to the child.
Watch for symptoms.
During this time caregivers should monitor themselves for symptoms.
Check the child’s temperature twice a day and watch for symptoms of COVID-19, such as fever, cough or shortness of breath, or symptoms specific to children.*
If the child develops symptoms, call the child’s healthcare provider for medical advice and follow the steps for caring for someone who is sick.
If possible, the child should stay away from people who are at higher-risk for getting very sick from COVID-19.


Children staying outside the home with a temporary caregiver

If the child will stay outside of their own home with a temporary caregiver, the new caregiver should help the child to quarantine and do the following:

The child should stay inside the caregiver’s home until 14 days after their last close contact with the sick person.
Watch for symptoms.
During this time the caregiver should monitor themselves for symptoms and practice everyday preventive actions.
Check the child’s temperature twice a day and watch for symptoms of COVID-19, such as fever, cough or shortness of breath, or symptoms specific to children.*
If the child does develop symptoms, call the child’s healthcare provider for medical advice and follow the steps for caring for someone who is sick.
If possible, the child should stay away from people who are at higher-risk for getting very sick from COVID-19.
The caregiver should then quarantine for 14 days after the last day the caregiver had contact with the sick child.

People are not required to quarantine if they have been fully vaccinated against the disease within the last three months and show no symptoms.

***When You Can be Around Others After You Had or Likely Had COVID-19

I think or know I had COVID-19, and I had symptoms
You can be around others after:

10 days since symptoms first appeared and
24 hours with no fever without the use of fever-reducing medications and
Other symptoms of COVID-19 are improving*
*Loss of taste and smell may persist for weeks or months after recovery and need not delay the end of isolation​

Most people do not require testing to decide when they can be around others; however, if your healthcare provider recommends testing, they will let you know when you can resume being around others based on your test results.

Note that these recommendations do not apply to persons with severe COVID-19 or with severely weakened immune systems (immunocompromised). These persons should follow the guidance below for “I was severely ill with COVID-19 or have a severely weakened immune system (immunocompromised) due to a health condition or medication. When can I be around others?”

I tested positive for COVID-19 but had no symptoms
If you continue to have no symptoms, you can be with others after 10 days have passed since you had a positive viral test for COVID-19. Most people do not require testing to decide when they can be around others; however, if your healthcare provider recommends testing, they will let you know when you can resume being around others based on your test results.

If you develop symptoms after testing positive, follow the guidance above for “I think or know I had COVID-19, and I had symptoms.”

I was severely ill with COVID-19 or have a severely weakened immune system (immunocompromised) due to a health condition or medication. When can I be around others?
People who are severely ill with COVID-19 might need to stay home longer than 10 days and up to 20 days after symptoms first appeared. Persons who are severely immunocompromised may require testing to determine when they can be around others. Talk to your healthcare provider for more information. If testing is available in your community, it may be recommended by your healthcare provider. Your healthcare provider will let you know if you can resume being around other people based on the results of your testing.

Your doctor may work with an infectious disease expert or your local health department to determine whether testing will be necessary before you can be around others.

For Anyone Who Has Been Around a Person with COVID-19
Anyone who has had close contact with someone with COVID-19 should stay home for 14 days after their last exposure to that person.

The best way to protect yourself and others is to stay home for 14 days if you think you’ve been exposed to someone who has COVID-19. Check your local health department’s website for information about options in your area to possibly shorten this quarantine period.
However, anyone who has had close contact with someone with COVID-19 and who meets the following criteria does NOT need to stay home.

Someone who has been fully vaccinated within the last three months and shows no symptoms of COVID-19
Or:

Someone who has COVID-19 illness within the previous 3 months and
Has recovered and
Remains without COVID-19 symptoms (for example, cough, shortness of breath)

Confirmed and suspected cases of reinfection of the virus that causes COVID-19
Cases of reinfection of COVID-19 have been reported but are rare. In general, reinfection means a person was infected (got sick) once, recovered, and then later became infected again. Based on what we know from similar viruses, some reinfections are expected.

For Healthcare Professionals
If you are a healthcare professional who thinks or knows you had COVID-19, you should follow the same recommendations listed above for when you can resume being around others outside the workplace. When you can return to work depends on different factors and situations. For information on when you can return to work, see the following:

Treatments Your Healthcare Provider Might Recommend if You Are Sick

Treatments used for COVID-19 should be prescribed by your healthcare provider. People have been seriously harmed and even died after taking products not approved for COVID-19, even products approved or prescribed for other uses.

Drugs Approved or Authorized for Use
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved one drug, remdesivir (Veklury), to treat COVID-19.
The FDA can also issue emergency use authorizations (EUAs) to allow healthcare providers to use products that are not yet approved, or that are approved for other uses, to treat patients with COVID-19 if certain legal requirements are met.
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) has developed and regularly updates Treatment Guidelines to help guide healthcare providers caring for patients with COVID-19, including when clinicians might consider using one of the products under an EUA.

Treatment Outside of the Hospital
If you receive a positive test result for COVID-19 and are more likely to get very sick from COVID-19, your healthcare provider may recommend that you receive treatment.

For people at high risk of disease progression. The FDA has issued EUAs for two investigational monoclonal antibodies that can attach to parts of the virus. These antibodies could help the immune system recognize and respond more effectively to the virus.
Bamlanivimab and casirivimab plus imdevimab are available under FDA EUAs for patients at high risk of disease progression and severe illness. Preliminary data suggest that some outpatients may benefit from receiving anti-SARS-CoV-2 monoclonal antibodies early in the course of infection. The NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines find that, to date, there are insufficient data from clinical trials to recommend for or against these treatments and these treatments should not be considered standard of care.
Your healthcare provider also may recommend the following to relieve symptoms and support your body’s natural defenses.

Taking medications, like acetaminophen or ibuprofen, to reduce fever.
Drinking water or receiving intravenous fluids to stay hydrated.
Getting plenty of rest to help the body fight the virus.

Treatment in the Hospital
Your healthcare provider will decide on what approach to take for your treatment. There are drugs that have shown some benefit in reducing the severity of illness or risk of death for patients in the hospital by:

Slowing the virus. Antiviral medications reduce the ability of the virus to multiply and spread through the body.
Remdesivir  (Veklury) is an antiviral medication approved by FDA to treat COVID-19. The current NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines  recommend remdesivir for certain patients who are hospitalized with COVID-19. Remdesivir is given to patients by infusion through their veins.
Reducing an overactive immune response. In patients with severe COVID-19, the body’s immune system may overreact to the threat of the virus, worsening the disease. This can cause damage to the body’s organs and tissues. Some treatments can help reduce this overactive immune response.
Dexamethasone  is a steroid medication, similar to a natural hormone produced by the body. The NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines  recommend dexamethasone, or a similar medication, to prevent or reduce injury to the body for some hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19. Dexamethasone is recommended for patients who need supplemental oxygen.
Treating complications. COVID-19 can damage the heart, blood vessels, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, and gastrointestinal organs. It also can cause other complications. Depending on the complications, additional treatments might be used for severely ill hospitalized patients, such as blood thinners to prevent or treat blood clots.
Supporting the body’s immune function. Plasma from patients who have recovered from COVID-19—called convalescent plasma—can contain antibodies to the virus. This could help the immune system recognize and respond more effectively to the virus, but currently the NIH COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines find there is not enough evidence to recommend these treatments.

Slow the spread of COVID-19
The best way to protect yourself is to avoid getting or spreading COVID-19.

Stay 6 feet from others who don’t live in your household
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth.
Avoid crowds and poorly ventilated places.
Wash your hands often.
Cover your coughs and sneezes.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces.
Monitor your health daily.
Getting a flu vaccine is more important than ever this flu season to protect yourself, your family and your community from flu. A flu vaccine can also help reduce the burden on our healthcare systems responding to the COVID-19 pandemic and save medical resources for care of COVID-19 patients.

If you think you may have been exposed to a person with COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider.
Stay home and away from the people you live with to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in your home.
Consider getting tested.
Monitor your symptoms.
If someone is showing emergency warning signs, get medical care immediately. Emergency warning signs include:
Trouble breathing
Persistent pain or pressure in the chest
New confusion
Inability to wake or stay awake
Bluish lips or face.

***Long-Term Effects of COVID-19

CDC is actively working to learn more about the whole range of short- and long-term health effects associated with COVID-19. As the pandemic unfolds, we are learning that many organs besides the lungs are affected by COVID-19 and there are many ways the infection can affect someone’s health.

While most persons with COVID-19 recover and return to normal health, some patients can have symptoms that can last for weeks or even months after recovery from acute illness. Even people who are not hospitalized and who have mild illness can experience persistent or late symptoms. Multi-year studies are underway to further investigate. CDC continues to work to identify how common these symptoms are, who is most likely to get them, and whether these symptoms eventually resolve.

The most commonly reported long-term symptoms include:

Fatigue
Shortness of breath
Cough
Joint pain
Chest pain
Other reported long-term symptoms include:

Difficulty with thinking and concentration (sometimes referred to as “brain fog”)
Depression
Muscle pain
Headache
Intermittent fever
Fast-beating or pounding heart (also known as heart palpitations)
More serious long-term complications appear to be less common but have been reported. These have been noted to affect different organ systems in the body. These include:

Cardiovascular: inflammation of the heart muscle
Respiratory: lung function abnormalities
Renal: acute kidney injury
Dermatologic: rash, hair loss
Neurological: smell and taste problems, sleep issues, difficulty with concentration, memory problems
Psychiatric: depression, anxiety, changes in mood
The long-term significance of these effects is not yet known. CDC will continue active investigation and provide updates as new data emerge, which can inform COVID-19 clinical care as well as the public health response to COVID-19.

***Older Adults

What you need to know
Risk for severe illness with COVID-19 increases with age, with older adults at highest risk.
Certain medical conditions can also increase risk for severe illness.
People at increased risk, and those who live or visit with them, need to take precautions to protect themselves from getting COVID-19.

Age Increases Risk for Severe Illness
The risk for severe illness with COVID-19 increases with age, with older adults at highest risk.
For example, people in their 50s are at higher risk for severe illness than people in their 40s. Similarly, people in their 60s or 70s are, in general, at higher risk for severe illness than people in their 50s. The greatest risk for severe illness from COVID-19 is among those aged 85 or older.

Severe illness means that a person with COVID-19 may require:

hospitalization,
intensive care, or a
ventilator to help them breathe, or
they may even die.
Age Increases Risk for Hospitalization
Older adults are at greater risk of requiring hospitalization or dying if they are diagnosed with COVID-19. As you get older, your risk of being hospitalized for COVID-19 increases.

Certain Medical Conditions Can Increase Risk
Other factors can also increase your risk for severe illness, such as having certain underlying medical conditions. By understanding the factors that put you at an increased risk, you can make decisions about what kind of precautions to take in your daily life.

If you have an underlying medical condition, you should continue to follow your treatment plan:

@Continue to take your medicines.
Do not change your treatment plan without talking to your healthcare provider.

@Have at least a 30-day supply of medicine.

Talk to a healthcare provider, insurer, and pharmacist about getting an extra supply (i.e., more than 30 days) of prescription medicines, if possible, to reduce your trips to the pharmacy.

@Do not delay getting emergency care.
Emergency departments have contingency infection prevention plans to protect you from getting COVID-19 if you need care.

@Call your healthcare provider about underlying medical conditions

if you have any concerns about your underlying medical conditions or if you get sick and think that you may have COVID-19. If you need emergency help, call 911 right away.

If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center or health department.

Reduce Your Risk of Getting Sick
Everyone, especially older adults and others at increased risk of severe illness, should take steps to protect themselves from getting COVID-19.

Steps to Reduce Your Risk
It is especially important for people at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19, and those who live or visit with them, to protect themselves from getting COVID-19.
The best way to protect yourself and to help reduce the spread of the virus that causes COVID-19 is to:

@Wear a mask.

@Limit in person interaction.

@Keep 6 feet of distance.

@Wash hands often.
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.

@Don't touch your face
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.

@Cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue or elbow
Then wash your hands.

@Clean and disinfect surfaces.
This includes things you touch often.
Learn additional information for adults with disabilities.

@How to Protect Yourself
If you start feeling sick and think you may have COVID-19, get in touch with your healthcare provider within 24 hours.

@Before You Go Out or Visit Family & Friends
Consider the level of risk before deciding to go out and ensure that people at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19 and those who live with them, are taking steps to protect themselves.
There is no way to ensure you have zero risk of getting the virus that causes COVID-19.  So, it is important to understand the risks and know how to reduce your risk as much as possible if or when you do resume some activities, run errands, and attend events and gatherings.

Consider the Level of Risk
In general, the more people you interact with, the more closely you interact with them, and the longer that interaction, the higher your risk of getting and spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
Before you go out, consider the following:

@How many people will you interact with?
Can you keep 6 feet of space between you and others?
Will you be outdoors or indoors?
What’s the length of time that you will be interacting with people?
How likely is it that people will be wearing a mask?
Consider avoiding activities where taking protective measures may be difficult, such as activities where social distancing can’t be maintained.

Take Steps to Protect Yourself
Everyone should take steps to prevent getting and spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to protect themselves, their communities, and people who are at increased risk of severe illness.

@If you decide to engage in public activities:

Protect yourself by practicing everyday preventive actions.
Plan shopping trips when stores are typically less crowded in early morning or late in the evenings. Older adults can use “senior hours” when shopping.
Use alternatives to on-site dining such as delivery, take-out, and curb-side pick-up.
Keep these items on hand and use them when venturing out: a mask, tissues, and a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid others who are not wearing masks.

Wear masks
Masks should be worn over the nose and mouth. Masks are especially important when it is difficult to stay at least 6 feet apart from others or when people are indoors to help protect each other.
Masks offer some protection to you and are also meant to protect those around you, in case you are unknowingly infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
CDC recognizes that wearing masks may not be possible in every situation or for some people. Some older adults with cognitive, sensory, or behavioral issues might find wearing a mask difficult. Adaptations and alternatives should be considered whenever possible to increase the feasibility of wearing a mask or to reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19 if it is not possible to wear one. These adults need to take extra precautions when interacting with others. Additionally, some older adults may rely on reading lips or facial expressions during social interactions. This can be difficult when others are wearing masks that cover large portions of their face.

Encourage social distancing during your visit
Visit with your friends and family outdoors, when possible. If this is not feasible, make sure the room or space is well-ventilated (for example, open windows or doors) and large enough to accommodate social distancing, staying 6 feet apart.
Arrange tables and chairs to allow for social distancing. People from the same household can be in groups together and don’t need to be 6 feet apart from each other.
Try to avoid close contact with your visitors. For example, don’t shake hands, elbow bump, or hug. Instead wave and verbally greet them.
If possible, avoid others who are not wearing masks or ask others around you to wear masks.
Consider keeping a list of people you visited or who visited you and when the visit occurred. This will help with contact tracing if someone becomes sick.
Learn about additional considerations for adults with developmental or behavioral disorders who might have difficulty with social distancing.

Practice hand hygiene often
Everyone should wash their hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds at the beginning and end of the visit and whenever you think your hands may have become contaminated.
If soap and water are not readily available, such as with outdoor visits or activities, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
Use single-use hand towels or paper towels for drying hands to avoid sharing towels. Have a no-touch trash can available for guests to use.
Limit contact with commonly touched surfaces or shared items.

@When to delay or cancel a visit
Delay or cancel a visit if you or your visitors have symptoms of COVID-19 or have been exposed to someone with COVID-19 in the last 14 days.
Anyone who has had close contact with a person with COVID-19 should stay home and monitor for symptoms.
Consider current levels of COVID-19 infection in your specific community. If infection is widespread, consider delaying or cancelling a visit.

@Precautions for Nursing Homes and Senior Living Facilities
If you, a family member, or friend lives in a nursing home, assisted living facility, or other type of senior living facility, you may be concerned about COVID-19.

@To protect friends and family members in these facilities, CDC has advised that long-term care facilities:

Restrict visitors,
Require or recommend visitors (including healthcare workers, aides, and staff) wear masks over their nose and mouth, if visitors are allowed,
Permit visitation only during select hours and limit the number of visitors per resident (e.g., no more than 2 visitors at one time),
Schedule visitation in advance to enable continued social distancing,
Restrict visitation to the resident’s room or another designated location at the facility (e.g., outside),
Regularly check healthcare workers and residents for fevers and symptoms, and
Limit activities within the facility to keep residents distanced from each other.

@If You Are Sick or Think You Were Exposed to COVID-19
Contact Your Healthcare Provider & Seek Care
If you have symptoms of COVID-19, get in touch with your healthcare provider within 24 hours, and follow steps for when you feel sick. You can use CDC’s self-checker to help you make decisions.
If you or someone you know has COVID-19 emergency warning signs (e.g., trouble breathing, persistent chest pain, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone or face), seek emergency care immediately. Call 911.
If you think you might have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider. If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center  or health department.
You can visit your state or local  health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Check Your Symptoms

@Symptoms of COVID-19 can range from mild symptoms to severe illness and death. Symptoms may appear 2-14 days after exposure.

In some cases, older adults and people of any age with underlying medical conditions may have symptoms that are not typically seen in others, or they may take longer than others to develop fever and other symptoms.

Fever Temperatures Can be Lower in Older Adults

In older adults (aged 65 and older), normal body temperature can be lower than in younger adults. For this reason, fever temperatures can also be lower in older adults.

If you are an older adult experiencing fever or other symptoms and want to get tested for the virus that causes COVID-19, call your healthcare provider first. You can also visit your state or local  health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing. If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health centere or health department.

@If you are caring for a patient aged 65 or older,
 be aware that a single reading higher than 100°F (37.8°C), multiple readings above 99°F (37.2°C), or a rise in temperature greater than 2°F (1.1°C) above the patient’s normal (baseline) temperature may be a sign of infection

Develop a Care Plan
A care plan summarizes your:

medical conditions,
medicines,
healthcare providers,
emergency contacts, and
end-of-life care options (for example, advance directives).
Complete your care plan in consultation with your doctor, and if needed, with help from a family member, caregiver or home health aide.

@A care plan can have benefits beyond the current pandemic.
You can update your care plan every year, or any time you have a change in your health or medicines. Care plans can help reduce emergency room visits and hospitalizations and improve overall medical management for people with a chronic medical condition, resulting in better quality of life.

@Everyday Steps to Stay Healthy
Staying healthy during the pandemic is important. Talk to your healthcare provider about whether your vaccinations and other preventive services are up to date to help prevent you from becoming ill with other diseases.

It is particularly important for those at increased risk of severe illness, including older adults, to receive recommended vaccinations against influenza and pneumococcal disease.
Remember the importance of staying physically active and practicing healthy habits to cope with stress.
Talk with your healthcare provider about maintaining preventive services like cancer screenings during the pandemic.
If you have a medical emergency, do not delay seeking emergency care.
You may feel increased stress during this pandemic. Fear and anxiety can be overwhelming and cause strong emotions.  Learn about stress and coping.
Get tips on staying connected while at home in English and Spanish icon There are community agencies who may be able to help, and call lines that provide a friendly voice and emotional support to older adults.


***Pregnant People

What you need to know
Although the overall risk of severe illness is low, pregnant people are at an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 when compared to non-pregnant people 1.
Having certain underlying medical conditions, and other factors, such as age or occupation, can further increase a pregnant person’s risk for developing severe illness.
Pregnant people with COVID-19 might also be at increased risk for other poor outcomes, such as preterm birth (delivering the baby earlier than 37 weeks).
Pregnant people and people who live with or visit them need to take steps to protect themselves from getting sick with COVID-19.

Increased Risk of Severe Illness
Severe illness means that a person with COVID-19 may require:

hospitalization,
intensive care,
a ventilator or special equipment to help them breathe
People with COVID-19 who become severely ill may even die.


Certain Factors Can Increase Risk
Other factors can further increase a pregnant person’s risk for experiencing severe illness from COVID-19, such as having certain underlying medical conditions or being older than a certain age 2. People with an underlying medical condition should continue to follow the treatment plan prescribed by their healthcare provider.

Conditions in the places where pregnant people live, learn, work, play, and worship also affect health risks and outcomes, such as getting sick with COVID-19 or developing severe illness. For example, people who are pregnant and work in places where they cannot keep their distance from people who may be sick, like healthcare providers, are at increased risk for getting sick and developing severe illness from COVID-19. Long-standing systemic health and social inequities have put pregnant people from some racial and ethnic minority groups at increased risk of getting sick from COVID-19.

Understanding additional factors that can put pregnant people at an increased risk can help them make decisions about what kind of precautions to take to protect themselves from infection.

Effect on Pregnancy Outcomes
Pregnant people with COVID-19 might be at increased risk for other poor outcomes related to pregnancy, such as preterm birth (delivering the baby earlier than 37 weeks) 3.

Reducing your risk of getting COVID-19
It is especially important for pregnant people, and those who live or visit with them, to take steps to protect themselves from getting COVID-19.

There is no way to have zero risk of infection, so it is important to know how to be as safe as possible. Consider your own personal situation and the risk for you, your family, and your community when deciding whether or not to go out or interact with people who do not live with you. Ensure you and the people who live with you are taking steps to protect themselves.

The best ways to protect yourself and to help reduce the spread of COVID-19 is to:

Limit in-person interactions with people who might have been exposed to or who might be infected with COVID-19, including people within your household, as much as possible.
Take steps to prevent getting COVID-19 when you do interact with others.
Wear a mask. Avoid others who are not wearing masks or ask others around you to wear a mask that fully covers the nose and mouth and fits well to the face.
Keep space between yourself and others (stay at least 6 feet away, which is about 2 arm lengths).
Avoid crowds.
Avoid poorly ventilated spaces.
Wash your hands often. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
Cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue or the inside of your elbow. Then wash your hands.
Clean surfaces and things you touch often with soap or detergent.
Keep at least a 30-day supply of prescription and non-prescription medicines. Talk to a healthcare provider, insurer, or pharmacist about getting an extra supply (for example, more than 30 days) of prescription medicines, if possible, to reduce your trips to the pharmacy.
Consider getting a COVID-19 vaccine when its available to you. Talk with your healthcare provider if you have questions.
Top of Page
COVID-19 Vaccine and Pregnancy
If you are pregnant and  part of a group recommended to receive the COVID-19 vaccine, you may choose to be vaccinated. Talk to a healthcare provider. This will help you make an informed decision about whether to choose to be vaccinated.

Even if you have received the COVID-19 vaccine, it’s important to continue taking steps described above to help stop the spread of COVID-19.


Staying healthy during your pregnancy
Keep all of your healthcare appointments during and after pregnancy. Visit with your healthcare provider for all recommended appointments. If you’re concerned about going to your appointments because of COVID-19, ask your healthcare provider what steps they are taking to separate healthy patients from those who might be sick or ask about telemedicine options. If you need help finding a healthcare provider, contact your nearest hospital clinic, community health center external iconor health department.
Talk to your healthcare provider about how to stay healthy and take care of yourself and your baby.
Ask questions you have about the best place to deliver your baby. Delivering your baby is always safest under the care of trained healthcare professionals.
You should also talk to your healthcare provider if you think you are experiencing depression during or after pregnancy.
Get recommended vaccines during pregnancy. These vaccines can help protect you and your baby.
Get a flu vaccine every year. Others living in your household should also get vaccinated to protect themselves and you.
Get the whooping cough (Tdap) vaccine during pregnancy to protect your baby against whooping cough, which can have similar symptoms to COVID-19. CDC recommends all women receive a Tdap vaccine during each pregnancy.
Call your healthcare provider if you have any concerns about your pregnancy or if you get sick or think that you may have COVID-19.
Do not delay getting emergency care because of COVID-19. Emergency departments have steps in place to protect you from getting COVID-19 if you need care. If you need emergency help, call 911 right away.
Tell them that you are pregnant and are having an emergency. If someone else is driving to the emergency department, call while you are on the way. If you must drive yourself call before you start driving.​
Seek medical care immediately if you experience any urgent maternal warning signs and symptoms. These symptoms could indicate a potentially life-threatening complication.

Top of Page
If you are sick or think you were exposed to COVID-19
If you have symptoms of COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider within 24 hours, and follow steps for when you feel sick.
If you or someone you know has COVID-19 emergency warning signs (for example, trouble breathing, persistent chest pain, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake), seek emergency care immediately. Call 911.

***People with Certain Medical Conditions

Asthma (moderate-to-severe)
Having moderate-to-severe asthma might increase your risk for severe illness from COVID-19.

Actions to take

@Keep it under control by following your asthma action plan
@Continue current medicines.
Current medicines including any inhalers with steroids in them (“steroids” is another word for corticosteroids). Know how to use your inhaler.  Avoid your asthma triggers.
@Make sure you have 30 day supply of medicine
@Call your healthcare provider if you feel sick.
Call your healthcare provider or care team if you have concerns about your condition, your treatment, think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, have any new signs or symptoms of illness or any other questions.
If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center or health department.
Call your healthcare provider if you have concerns about your condition or feel sick. If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center or health department.
@Have another member of your household who doesn’t have asthma clean and disinfect your house for you. 

When they use cleaning and disinfecting products, have them:
Make sure that people with asthma are not in the room.
Avoid using disinfectants known to trigger asthma attacks.
Open windows or doors and use a fan that blows air outdoors.
Always follow the instructions on the product label.
To minimize cleaners from spreading in the air, pour spray products onto a cleaning cloth or paper towel instead of spraying the product directly onto the cleaning surface (if the product label allows).


Cancer
Having cancer currently increases your risk of severe illness from COVID-19. At this time, it is not known whether having a history of cancer increases your risk.

Actions to take:

Have a conversation with your healthcare provider or care team to discuss your individual level of risk based on your condition, your treatment, and the level of transmission in your community.
Do not stop taking your medicines or alter your treatment plan without talking to your healthcare provider.
Make sure that you have at least a 30-day supply of your medicines.
Do not delay life-saving treatment or emergency care.
Call your healthcare provider or care team if you have concerns about your condition, your treatment, think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, have any new signs or symptoms of illness, or any other questions.
If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center or health department.
For more information on preventing infections for people with cancer.

Chronic kidney disease
Having chronic kidney disease of any stage increases your risk for severe illness from COVID-19.

Actions to take

Continue your medicines and your diet as directed by your healthcare provider.
Make sure that you have at least a 30-day supply of your medicines.
Stay in contact with your healthcare team as often as possible, especially if you have any new signs or symptoms of illness. Also reach out to them if you can’t get the medicines or foods you need.
If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center or health department.
Have shelf-stable food choices to help you follow your kidney diet.
If you are on dialysis:
Contact your dialysis clinic and your healthcare provider if you feel sick or have concerns.
Do NOT miss your treatments.
Plan to have enough food on hand to follow the KCER 3-Day Emergency Diet Plane for dialysis patients in case you are unable to maintain your normal treatment schedule.

COPD, cystic fibrosis, pulmonary fibrosis, and other chronic lung diseases
Having COPD (including emphysema and chronic bronchitis) is known to increase your risk of severe illness from COVID-19. Other chronic lung diseases, such as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and cystic fibrosis, might increase your risk of severe illness from COVID-19.

Actions to take

Keep taking your current medicines, including those with steroids in them (“steroids” is another word for corticosteroids).
Make sure that you have at least a 30-day supply of your medicines.
Avoid triggers that make your symptoms worse.
Call your healthcare provider or care team if you have concerns about your condition, your treatment, think you may have been exposed to COVID-19, have any new signs or symptoms of illness or any other questions.
If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center or health department.
Learn more about COPD.



***Rural Communities
About 46 million Americans live in rural areas, which face distinctive challenges during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Long-standing systemic health and social inequities have put some rural residents at increased risk of getting COVID-19 or having severe illness. In general, rural Americans tend to have higher rates of cigarette smoking, high blood pressure, and obesity as well as less access to healthcare which can negatively affect health outcomes. They are also less likely to have health insurance.

Rural communities are also becoming more diverse racially and ethnically. Racial and ethnic minority groups including, African Americans, Hispanics and Latinos, American Indians/Alaskan Natives, and Asian/Pacific Islanders, are at increased risk of getting COVID-19 and having severe illness.

Rural areas can face different health challenges depending on where they are located. Each rural community should assess their unique susceptibility and social vulnerability to COVID-19. Many rural communities are considered highly vulnerable according to CDC’s Social Vulnerability Index (SVI). The SVI includes factors such as housing, transportation, socioeconomic status, housing, race and ethnicity, and language which can be helpful in determining how to help support rural communities before, during, and after COVID-19.

Rural communities also have strengths, assets, and protective factors that public health can use to tailor policies and messages designed to:

reduce the risk of COVID-19 community spread and
improve the general health of rural populations, which may minimize the severity of COVID-19.

How Rural Communities Can Respond During COVID-19
Approaches for public health professionals
Review data and other resources to better understand the burden of disease in your community and state.
Network and collaborate with healthcare providers and others (e.g., health departments in other jurisdictions, pharmacists, nutritionists, community health workers, educators, counselors, businesses, and advocacy, community, labor, and faith-based organizations).
Identify partners’ needs and ways to access resources such as personal protective equipment (PPE), medicines (including naloxone for opioid overdose), and other necessary items.
Work with advocacy, community, labor, and faith-based organizations to better understand the community’s knowledge, needs, barriers, and challenges around COVID-19 prevention
Include trusted community leaders who serve racial and ethnic minority populations and people with disabilities.
Learn about special challenges or misconceptions that partners may encounter in their interactions with community members and help identify opportunities to engage with the community.
Tailor communication strategies to educate and inform rural residents about COVID-19 and ways they can protect themselves, coupled with general education on physical activity, healthy eating, chronic disease management, and coping with stress.
Get community input when developing materials, if possible.
To foster a sense of trust and credibility, share messages and materials that are sensitive to unique health issues, access to care, and lifestyle challenges.
Develop culturally appropriate messages for racial and ethnic minority
Ensure messages are appropriate for people with disabilities.
Make sure messages are easy to understand. Use storytelling to convey complex information.
Use CDC COVID-19 communication resources, especially videos, when appropriate.
Use Spanish and other language translations that are available, when needed.

Approaches for rural healthcare systems and healthcare providers
Planning

Develop a COVID-19 action plan with your staff and make adjustments to office, service, and patient procedures based on the patient populations you serve (e.g., older adults with chronic illnesses, people with disabilities, people with substance use disorders, children).
Look for innovative ways to provide health services during COVID-19.
Identify a plan for transporting people with COVID-19, including those with disabilities, for care at other healthcare systems and/or providers if your hospital or facility is closed or offering decreased services.
Review CDC guidance on how people can protect themselves when using shared transportation during the COVID-19 outbreak.
Prepare for surges in care by developing plans to re-open closed hospital facilities temporarily for low-level care.
See CDC Preparedness Tools and RHIhub’s Rural Healthcare Surge Readiness resourcese for information on preparing or responding to surges.
Maximize existing personal protective equipment to prevent shortages. Review CDC guidance on optimizing PPE supplies.
Partner with state and local health departments, hospitals, and other healthcare systems, including those in metropolitan areas to:
Get regular information about local infection rates.
Develop a contact tracing plan.
Offer telehealth services to reduce risk of infection in clinical setting.

Patient Care

Call the Clinician On-Call Center, a 24-hour hotline with trained CDC clinicians standing by to answer COVID-19 questions.
Call 1-800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636) and ask for the Clinician On-Call Center.
Explain to patients at high risk of severe illness from COVID-19 how they can protect themselves from infection, even if transmission rates seem to be low in your community.
Share COVID-19 resources to keep patients informed, safe, and empowered.
Learn how to file claims for reimbursement for providing COVID-19 testing or treatment for uninsured patients.
Find ways to ensure COVID-19 testing needs are met by working with state and local health departments and commercial laboratories.
Assess risk for harms of opioid use as more people may be using substances alone, without others around to administer naloxone, perform life-saving measures, or call for help in case of overdose.
Review CDC Guidance for Syringe Service Programs (SSPS) and COVID-19 resources for people who us drugs or have substance use disorder.

Approaches for community-based organizations and interest groups
Review COVID-19 information, considerations for community-based organizations, and communication resources from federal, state, and local governments.
Inform your community that COVID-19 cases can occur, even with careful planning and preparation. Some people can spread the disease before they start having symptoms, or even if they never have symptoms.
Educate the community about COVID-19 prevention behaviors and use of masks.
Provide information on hygiene practices and limiting travel.
Plan and communicate about consistent mitigation activities.

Engage community members in education campaigns and mitigation efforts.
Residents, local business, and media may have creative ideas on ways to protect their community.
Find innovative ideas on the Rural Health Information Hub (RHIhub ).
Be aware of possible stigma related to testing and having COVID-19.
Work with local healthcare providers and organizations to develop a Community Health Work (CHW) program if the community does not already have one.
Make every attempt to continue services for rural homeless populations in the event of community spread of COVID-19. See CDC’s resources for supporting people experiencing homelessness
See CDC communication resources.

Approaches for rural residents
The best way to prevent becoming sick is to avoid being exposed to the virus. This means staying home whenever possible and avoiding public places where you may encounter many other people. If you are near other people, try to keep 6 feet apart (about two arm lengths).
Use masks and other COVID-19 prevention behaviors to limit exposure to the virus.
Know how to contact a healthcare provider if you or a family member becomes ill.
Keep preventive care and other routine healthcare appointments, such as vaccinations and blood pressure checks, when possible. Check with your provider about safety precautions for office visits.
Volunteer by contacting community service organizations and ask how you can help.
Make and distribute masks for others in the community.
Help older adults, people with disabilities, and others at increased risk for severe COVID-19 illness, in your family or in the community, by shopping for groceries or running errands.
Create an information card with the phone numbers and addresses of healthcare facilities, along with the family and friends who live nearest to you.
Locate state, local, or tribal health centers in advance to learn where to get tested for COVID-19, along with other COVID-19 health information.
Create a phone tree system with family, friends, and neighbors that will be helpful to share information and get messages out quickly if COVID-19 affects your community.
Know medicines your family members may need and see if you can have extra on hand to reduce visits to the pharmacist while COVID-19 is circulating in the community.
Many health insurance plans now allow for early access to prescriptions, for more than a 90-day supply of medication.
Find ways that you and your family can cope with stress.

Approaches for businesses and workplaces
Consult with your local health department to get updated information about COVID-19 cases in the area.
Review CDC’s resources for businesses.
Talk to employees about their concerns, and share resources to keep employees and their families safe and help them cope with stress.
Use strategies that help prevent the spread of COVID-19 in the workplace, and help protect all employees, including those at higher risk. These strategies include:
Consider telework arrangements, if possible, along with other social distancing practices (staying at least 6 feet away from other people. This might mean making changes to the physical environment such as adding physical barriers (dividers).
Encourage employees to stay home when sick using paid or non-punitive sick leave.
Promote handwashing.
Provide supplies for cleaning and disinfecting workspaces and appropriate personal protective equipment.

Additional considerations
People in rural areas are often in close proximity to animals, whether livestock, pets, or wildlife. Interactions between people and animals may occur during farming, working with animals, interacting with pets, visiting fairs or animal exhibitions, or coming into contact with wildlife while hunting, hiking, or during other outdoor activities, as well as when wildlife wander near homes. We are still learning about the virus that causes COVID-19, but it appears that it can spread from people to certain types of animals, including pets, in some situations. Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.

Why Rural Communities May Be at Higher Risk During the COVID-19 Pandemic
The health of populations in rural America
Rural Americans may be at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19 because they:

Are older than non-rural populations.
Have higher rates of underlying chronic disease even after adjusting for age.
Are more likely to have a disability:
Up to one-third of adults living in rural areas report having a disability, which is 9% higher than those living in more urban areas.
Up to 1 in 12 adults living in rural counties report having three or more disabilities, which is 24% higher than those living in more urban areas.
In the United States, adults with disabilities are 3 times as likely to have heart disease, stroke, diabetes, or cancer as those without disabilities.

Healthcare infrastructure
Rural healthcare infrastructure is limited. Since 2005, 170 hospitals have closed  and 700 more are currently at risk of closure. Many rural hospitals have a limited number of hospital beds, ICU beds, or ventilators, which can affect their ability to treat patients with COVID-19. Rural residents seeking care must often travel long distances to reach hospitals, health care facilities, and clinical specialists.

Additional infrastructure issues affecting a rural community’s ability to respond to COVID-19 include:

Emergency medical services (EMS) often use volunteers who must travel long distances to respond to a call.
Shortage of health professionals for primary care is common in many rural areas.
Public health departments serving rural areas often serve large geographic regions, which include non-rural populations, further straining limited resources.
Widespread use of telemedicine is not possible in some areas because of absent or unreliable broadband and internet communications.

Agricultural and food processing industries
Meat, poultry, and food processing industries are largely located in rural areas. Occupations in these industries often involve working closer than the recommended 6-foot distance, which puts workers at increased risk of getting and spreading COVID-19. Not only are workers at risk because of the conditions in these industries, but the industries are considered critical and less likely to close, leaving workers little choice but to come to work even when other businesses are shut because of high community transmission. COVID-19 outbreaks among meat and poultry processing facility workers can rapidly affect large numbers of workers and extend into the communities where they live. Targeted workplace interventions and prevention efforts that are tailored to the groups most affected by COVID-19 are critical to reducing the risk of getting COVID-19 at work.

***People with Disabilities

COVID-19 is a new disease and we are still learning how it spreads, the severity of illness it causes, and to what extent it may spread in the United States.

Disability alone may not be related to higher risk for getting COVID-19 or having severe illness. Most people with disabilities are not inherently at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from COVID-19.  However, some people with disabilities might be at a higher risk of infection or severe illness because of their underlying medical conditions.  All people seem to be at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19 if they have serious underlying chronic medical conditions like chronic lung disease, a serious heart condition, or a weakened immune system. Adults with disabilities are three times more likely than adults without disabilities to have heart disease, stroke, diabetes, or cancer than adults without disabilities.

You should talk with your healthcare provider if you have a question about your health or how your health condition is being managed.

Disability groups and risk
If you have one of the disability types listed below, you might be at increased risk of becoming infected or having unrecognized illness.  You should discuss your risk of illness with your healthcare provider.

People who have limited mobility or who cannot avoid coming into close contact with others who may be infected, such as direct support providers and family members
People who have trouble understanding information or practicing preventive measures, such as hand washing and social distancing
People who may not be able to communicate symptoms of illness

Protect yourself
If you or someone you care for are at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19, take steps to prevent getting sick. In addition to practicing everyday preventive actions, people with disabilities who have direct support providers can help protect themselves from respiratory illness in the following ways:

Ask your direct support provider if they are experiencing any symptoms of COVID-19 or if they have been in contact with someone who has COVID-19
Tell your direct service provider to
Wash their hands when they enter your home and before and after touching you (e.g., dressing, bathing/showering, transferring, toileting, feeding), handling tissues, or when changing linens or doing laundry. Learn more about proper handwashing.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces (e.g., counters, tabletops, doorknobs, bathroom fixtures, toilets, phones, keyboards, tablets, bedside tables), and equipment such as wheelchairs, scooters, walkers, canes, oxygen tanks and tubing, communication boards and other assistive devices. Refer to CDC’s General Recommendations for Routine Cleaning and Disinfections of Households.

Prepare
There are some additional things people with disabilities can do to prepare during the COVID-19 outbreak:

Plan what you will do if you or your direct support provider gets sick. Create a contact list of family, friends, neighbors and local service agencies that can provide support in case you or your direct support provider becomes ill or unavailable.
Plan at least two ways of communicating from home and work that can be used rapidly in an emergency (e.g., landline phone, cell phone, text-messaging, email).  Write down this information and keep it with you.
Have enough household items and groceries so that you will be comfortable staying home for a few weeks, at least a 30-day supply of over the counter and prescription medicines and any medical equipment or supplies that you might need. Some health plans allow for a 90-day refill on prescription medications. Consider discussing this option with your healthcare provider. Make a photocopy of prescriptions, as this may help in obtaining medications in an emergency situation.

About COVID-19
Coronavirus disease is a respiratory illness that can spread from person to person. The virus is thought to spread mainly between people who are in close contact with one another (within about 6 feet) through respiratory droplets produced when an infected person coughs or sneezes. It is also possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or eyes. For more information go to CDC’s Fact Sheet- What you need to know about coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) .
Risk of infection with COVID-19 is higher for people who are in close contact with someone known to have COVID-19, such as healthcare workers, direct support providers, and household members. Other people at higher risk for infection are those who live or have recently been in an area with ongoing spread of COVID-19.

Prevention
The best way to prevent infection is to take everyday preventive actions, including:

Wear a mask.
Stay at least 6 feet from people who don’t live with you.
Avoid crowds and poorly ventilated spaces.
Wash your hands often, or use hand sanitizer made with at least 60% alcohol.​
box tissue light icon

***People with Developmental and Behavioral Disorders

Developmental and behavioral disorders are a group of conditions due to an impairment in physical, learning, language, or behavior areas. These conditions begin during the developmental period, may affect day-to-day functioning, and usually last throughout a person’s lifetime.1

Some developmental and behavioral disorders include:

Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
Autism
Cerebral Palsy
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASDs)
Fragile X
Intellectual Disability
Learning Disorder
Tourette Syndrome

What do people with developmental and behavioral disorders need to know about COVID-19?
Know who is at risk for severe illness from COVID-19
Most people with developmental or behavioral disorders are not naturally at higher risk for becoming infected with or having severe illness from novel coronavirus (COVID-19). However, people with developmental or behavioral disorders who have serious underlying medical conditions may be at risk of serious illness. Some people with developmental or behavioral disorders may have difficulties accessing information, understanding or practicing preventative measures, and communicating symptoms of illness.

Know how to protect yourself and others
The best way to prevent illness is to avoid being exposed to this virus. Advice on preparation for COVID-19 and prevention of exposure to COVID-19 is available.

Continue with your routine care
Don’t stop any medications or change your treatment plan without talking to your healthcare provider.
Discuss any concerns about your treatment with your healthcare provider.
Ensure that you are obtaining the tests ordered by your healthcare provider.
Continue to get your routine immunizations.
Talk to your healthcare provider, insurer, and pharmacist about creating an emergency supply of prescription medications. Make sure that you have at least 30 days of prescription and over-the-counter medications and supplies on hand in case you need to stay home for a long time. Ask your healthcare provider if it is possible to obtain a 90-day supply of your prescription medications.
Make or update care plans or an emergency notebook. They typically include important information about a person’s medical conditions, how to manage those conditions, how to contact healthcare providers and therapists, allergies, information on medications (names, dosages, and administration instructions), preferences (food and other), and daily routines and activities. This may help you receive consistent care if your Direct Service Providers or family members are unavailable.
Related: Guidance for Direct Service Providers, Caregivers, Parents, and People with Developmental and Behavioral Disorders

Know how to manage stress and cope during the pandemic
It is natural to feel concerned or stressed as more cases of COVID-19 are discovered and our communities take action to slow the spread of disease. Taking care of yourself, your friends, and your family can help you cope with stress.

Ways to cope with stress

Take breaks from watching, reading, or listening to news stories, including social media. Hearing about the pandemic repeatedly can be upsetting.
Take care of your body.
Take deep breaths, stretch, or meditate.
Try to eat healthy, well-balanced meals.
Exercise regularly, get plenty of sleep.
Avoid alcohol and drugs .
Make time to unwind. Try to do some activities you enjoy.
Connect with others. Talk with people you trust about your concerns and how you are feeling.
Click here for information on how to take steps to help yourself cope with stress and anxiety.

Take care of your mental health
Anxiety, depression, and other mental health conditions can be more common in people with some developmental and behavioral disorders. If you are being treated for a mental health condition it is important to continue any therapies or medications.

Look out for these common signs of distress:

Feelings of numbness, disbelief, confusion, anxiety, or fear
Changes in appetite, energy, and activity levels
Difficulty concentrating
Difficulty sleeping or nightmares and upsetting thoughts and images
Physical reactions, such as headaches, body pains, stomach problems, and skin rashes
Worsening of chronic health problems
Anger or short temper
Increased use of alcohol, tobacco, or other drugs
If you experience these feelings or behaviors for several days in a row and are unable to carry out normal responsibilities because of them, call your healthcare provider or use the resources below to get help. If you are feeling overwhelmed with emotions like sadness, depression, anxiety, or thoughts of hurting or killing yourself or others:

***People Experiencing Homelessness

People who are homeless are at risk of COVID-19.

Homeless services are often provided in congregate settings, which could facilitate the spread of infection. Because many people who are homeless are older adults or have underlying medical conditions, they may also be at increased risk for severe illness.

Health departments and healthcare facilities should be aware that people who are homeless are a particularly vulnerable group. If possible, identifying non-congregate settings where those at increased risk can stay may help protect them from COVID-19.


How people experiencing homelessness can protect themselves
Many of the recommendations to prevent COVID-19 may be difficult for a person experiencing homelessness to do. Although it may not be possible to avoid certain crowded locations (such as shelters), people who are homeless should:

Try to avoid other crowded public settings.
If using public transportation, follow the CDC guidance on how to protect yourself when using transportation, try to travel during less busy times, and clean your hands as soon as possible after their trip.
If possible, use take-away options for food.
Maintain a distance of 6 feet (about two arms’ length) from other people.
Wash their hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds as often as possible, and cover their coughs and sneezes.

If people experiencing homelessness have symptoms
Any person experiencing homelessness with symptoms consistent with COVID-19  (fever, cough, or shortness of breath) should alert their service providers (such as case managers, shelter staff, and other care providers). These staff will help the individual understand how to isolate themselves and identify options for medical care as needed.

How to get tested for COVID-19
If they meet criteria for testing, people experiencing homelessness will access COVID-19 testing through a healthcare provider.

Local public health and healthcare facilities need to determine the best location for this testing in coordination with homeless healthcare clinics and street medicine clinics.

Anyone sick with COVID-19 should stay isolated
Those with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should stay in a place where they can best be isolated from other people to prevent spreading the infection. Local health departments, housing authorities, homeless service systems, and healthcare facilities should plan to identify locations to isolate those with known or suspected COVID-19 until they meet the criteria to end isolation.

Isolation housing could be units designated by local authorities or shelters determined to have capacity to sufficiently isolate these people. If no other options are available, homeless service providers should plan for how they can help people isolate themselves while efforts are underway to provide additional support.

Donations of food and clothing to homeless service providers
Homeless service providers can accept donations of food and clothing during community spread of COVID-19, but general infection control precautions should be taken. Request that donors not donate if they are sick.

Set up donation drop-off points to encourage social distancing between shelter workers and those donating.
Launder donated clothing, sheets, towels, or other fabrics on high heat settings, and disinfect items that are nonporous, such as items made of plastic.
Food donations should be shelf-stable, and shelter staff should take usual food-related infection prevention precautions

Symptom screening of clients at homeless shelters
Homeless shelters can screen clients for symptoms of respiratory infections.

Clients who have symptoms may or may not have COVID-19. Make sure they have a separate place they can safely stay within the shelter or at an alternate site in coordination with local health authorities.  An on-site nurse or other clinical staff can help with clinical assessments.

Provide anyone who presents with symptoms with a mask.
Facilitate access to non-urgent medical care as needed.
Use standard facility procedures to determine whether a client needs immediate medical attention.
Emergency signs include:
Trouble breathing
Persistent pain or pressure in the chest
New confusion or inability to arouse
Pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone
Notify the designated medical facility and personnel to transfer clients that the client might have COVID-19.

Keeping open homeless shelters and encampments
Homeless shelters serve a critical function in our communities. Shelters should stay open unless homeless service providers, health departments, and housing authorities have determined together that a shelter needs to close.

Connecting people to stable housing should continue to be a priority.

However, if individual housing options are not available, allow people who are living in encampments to remain where they are.
Encourage people living in encampments to increase space between people and provide hygiene resources.

***Pregnancy, Breastfeeding, and Caring for Newborns

@COVID-19 and pregnancy
Based on what we know at this time, pregnant people are at an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19 and death, compared to non-pregnant people. Additionally, pregnant people with COVID-19 might be at increased risk for other adverse outcomes, such as preterm birth (delivering the baby earlier than 37 weeks).

Reducing your risk of getting COVID-19
It is especially important for pregnant people, and those who live with them, to protect themselves from getting COVID-19.

@There is no way to have zero risk of infection, so it is important to know how to be as safe as possible. 
In general, the more people you are around, the closer you interact with them, and the longer that interaction, the higher your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19. Consider the level of risk when deciding whether or not to go out or interact with people who do not live with you. If you do go out, ensure you and the people who live with you are taking steps to protect themselves.

@The best way to protect yourself and to help reduce the spread of COVID-19 is to:

Limit interactions with people who might have been exposed to or who might be infected with COVID-19, including people within your household, as much as possible.
Take steps to prevent getting COVID-19 when you do interact with others.
Wear a mask, especially when you cannot keep distance from other people. Avoid others who are not wearing masks or ask others around you to wear a mask.
Stay at least 6 feet away from others outside your household.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid activities where taking these steps might be difficult.

@If you are sick or think you were exposed to COVID-19

If you have symptoms of COVID-19, get in touch with your healthcare provider within 24 hours, and follow steps for when you feel sick. You can use CDC’s self-checker to help you make decisions.
If you or someone you know has COVID-19 emergency warning signs (for example, trouble breathing, persistent chest pain, new confusion, inability to wake or stay awake, or pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone), seek emergency care immediately. Call 911.
If you think you might have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, contact your healthcare provider. If you don’t have a healthcare provider, contact your nearest community health center  or health department.

@Staying healthy during your pregnancy
Keep all of your healthcare appointments during and after pregnancy. Visit your healthcare provider for all recommended appointments. If you’re concerned about going to your appointments because of COVID-19, ask your healthcare provider what steps they are taking to separate healthy patients from those who might be sick. If you need help finding a healthcare provider, contact your nearest hospital clinic, community health center  or health department.
Talk to your healthcare provider about how to stay healthy and take care of yourself and your baby.
Ask questions you have about the best place to deliver your baby. Delivering your baby is always safest under the care of trained healthcare professionals.
You should also talk to your healthcare provider if you think you are experiencing depression during or after pregnancy.
Get recommended vaccines. Getting the recommended vaccines during pregnancy can help protect you and your baby.
Get vaccinated against influenza (flu). Others living in your household should also get vaccinated to protect themselves and you.
Get the whooping cough (Tdap) vaccine during pregnancy to protect your baby against whooping cough, which can have similar symptoms to COVID-19.
If you are part of a group recommended to receive the COVID-19 vaccine, you may choose to be vaccinated. Talk to a healthcare provider to help you make an informed decision.
Keep at least a 30-day supply of prescription and non-prescription medicines. Talk to a healthcare provider, insurer, or pharmacist about getting an extra supply (for example, more than 30 days) of prescription medicines, if possible, to reduce your trips to the pharmacy.
Call your healthcare provider if you have any concerns about your pregnancy or if you get sick and think that you may have COVID-19.
Do not delay getting emergency care because of COVID-19. Emergency departments have steps in place to protect you from getting COVID-19 if you need care. If you need emergency help, call 911 right away. Tell them that you are pregnant and are having an emergency. If someone else is driving to the emergency department, call while you are on the way. If you need to drive yourself call before you start driving.​

Caring for newborns when the mother has COVID-19
@While much is still unknown about the risks of COVID-19 to newborns born to mothers with COVID-19, we do know that:

COVID-19 is uncommon in newborns born to mothers who had COVID-19 during pregnancy.
Some newborns have tested positive for COVID-19 shortly after birth. It is unknown if these newborns got the virus before, during, or after birth.
Most newborns who tested positive for COVID-19 had mild or no symptoms and recovered. However, there are a few reports of newborns with severe COVID-19 illness.
Caring for your newborn in the hospital if you are diagnosed with or test positive for COVID-19.

@Current evidence suggests that the risk of a newborn getting COVID-19 from their mother is low, especially when the mother takes steps (such as wearing a mask and her washing hands) to prevent spread before and during care of the newborn.

Decide if your newborn is rooming-in with you in the hospital.

Discuss with your healthcare provider the risks and benefits of having your newborn stay in the same room with you. Having your newborn stay in the room with you has the benefit of facilitating breastfeeding and mother-newborn bonding. Start this conversation before the baby is born if possible.

Take precautions if your newborn is rooming-in with you in the hospital.

@If you are in isolation for COVID-19 and are sharing a room with your newborn, take the following steps to reduce the risk of spreading the virus to your newborn:

Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds before holding or caring for your newborn. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Wear a mask when within 6 feet of your newborn.
Keep your newborn more than 6 feet away from you as much as possible.
Discuss with your healthcare provider ways to protect your newborn, such as using a physical barrier (for example, placing the newborn in an incubator) while in the hospital.
Once your isolation period has ended, you should still wash your hands before caring for your newborn, but you do not need to take the other precautions. You most likely will not pass the virus to your newborn or any other close contacts after your isolation period has ended.

If you had symptoms, your isolation period ends after:

10 days since symptoms first appeared, and
24 hours with no fever, without fever-reducing medications, and
Other symptoms of COVID-19 are improving.
If you never had symptoms, your isolation period ends after
10 days have passed since the date of your positive COVID-19 test


Caring for your newborn at home if you are diagnosed with or test positive for COVID-19.

If you are in isolation for COVID-19, take the following precautions until your isolation period has ended:

@Stay home to separate yourself from others outside your home.

@Isolate (stay away) from other household members who are not infected, and wear a mask in shared spaces.

@Have a healthy caregiver who is not at increased risk for severe illness provide care for your newborn.

Caregivers should wash their hands for at least 20 seconds before touching your newborn. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
If the caregiver is living in the same home or has been in close contact with you, they might have been exposed. They should wear a mask when they are within 6 feet of your newborn for the entire time you are in isolation, and during their own quarantine after you complete your
If a healthy caregiver is not available, you can care for your newborn if you are well enough.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds before touching for your newborn. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Wear a mask when within 6 feet of your newborn and other people during your entire isolation period. The mask helps prevent you from spreading the virus to others.

@Others in your household, and caregivers who have COVID-19, should isolate and avoid caring for the newborn as much as possible. 
If they have to care for the newborn, they should follow hand washing and mask recommendations above.

Once your isolation period has ended, you should still wash your hands before caring for your newborn, but you don’t need to take the other precautions. You most likely won’t pass the virus to your newborn or any other close contacts after your isolation period has ended.

@If you had symptoms, your isolation period ends after:

10 days since symptoms first appeared, and
24 hours with no fever without fever-reducing medications, and
Other symptoms of COVID-19 are improving
If you never had symptoms, your isolation period ends after
10 days have passed since the date of your positive COVID-19 test
Top of Page
Breastfeeding and COVID-19
Current evidence suggests that breast milk is not likely to spread the virus to babies.

You, along with your family and healthcare providers, should decide whether and how to start or continue breastfeeding. Breast milk provides protection against many illnesses and is the best source of nutrition for most babies.

@Helpful tips for starting or restarting breastfeeding

You may find it harder to start or continue breastfeeding if you are not sharing a room with your newborn in the hospital. Here are some helpful tips:

Frequent hand expression or pumping will help you establish and build milk supply if you are separated from your newborn in the hospital.
Pump or feed every 2-3 hours (at least 8-10 times in 24 hours, including at night), especially in the first few days. This helps the breasts to produce milk and prevents blocked milk ducts and breast infections.
If you are unable to start producing milk in the hospital after birth, or if you have to temporarily stop breastfeeding during your COVID-19 illness because you do not feel well enough, get help from a lactation support provider. Learn more about restarting breastfeeding (also called relactation).
You should always wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds before breastfeeding or expressing breast milk, even if you don’t have COVID-19. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.

If you have COVID-19 and choose to breastfeed

Wash your hands before breastfeeding
Wear a mask while breastfeeding and whenever you are within 6 feet of your baby.
If you have COVID-19 and choose to express breast milk

Use your own breast pump (one not shared with anyone else), if possible.
Wear a mask during expression.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds before touching any pump or bottle parts, and before expressing breast milk.
Follow recommendations for proper pump cleaning after each use.  Clean all parts of the pump that come into contact with breast milk.
Consider having a healthy caregiver who does not have COVID-19, is not at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19, and is living in the same home feed the expressed breast milk to the baby. If the caregiver is living in the same home or has been in close contact with you, they might have been exposed. Any caregiver feeding the baby should wear a mask when caring for the baby for the entire time you are in isolation and during their own quarantine period after you complete isolation.
Top of Page
Keeping your baby safe and healthy
Do not put a face shield or mask on your baby

Children younger than two should not wear masks.
@A face shield could increase the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) or accidental suffocation and strangulation. 
Babies move around, and their movement can cause the plastic face shield to block their nose and mouth, or cause the strap to strangle them.
CDC does not recommend use of face shields as a substitute for masks.
Limit visitors to see your new baby

@The birth of a new baby is a significant life event that typically brings families together to celebrate and support the baby and new mother. 
However, before allowing or inviting visitors into your home or near your baby, consider the risk of COVID-19 to yourself, your baby, people who live with you, and visitors (e.g., grandparents or older adults and other people at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19).

@Bringing people who do not live with you into your home can increase the risk of spreading COVID-19.
Some people without symptoms can spread the virus.
Limit in-person gatherings and consider other options, like celebrating virtually, for people who want to see your new baby. If you do plan to have in-person visits, ask guests to stay home if they are sick and ask them to stay 6 feet away from you and your baby, wear a mask, and wash their hands when visiting your home. For more information, please see considerations for attending or hosting a small gathering.
Keep distance between your baby and people who do not live in your household or who are sick

Consider the risks of spreading COVID-19 to you and your baby before you decide whether to go out for activities other than healthcare visits or child care.
Keep 6 feet of distance between your baby and people who do not live in your household.
Ask your child care program about the plans they have in place to protect your baby, family, and their staff from COVID-19.
Know possible signs and symptoms of COVID-19 infection among babies

@Most babies who test positive for COVID-19 have mild or no symptoms.
Severe illness in babies has been reported but appears to be rare. Babies with underlying medical conditions and babies born premature (earlier than 37 weeks) might be at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Reported signs among newborns with COVID-19 include fever, lethargy (being overly tired or inactive), runny nose, cough, vomiting, diarrhea, poor feeding and increased work of breathing or shallow breathing.
If your baby develops symptoms or you think your baby may have been exposed to COVID-19:
Get in touch with your baby’s healthcare provider within 24 hours and follow steps for caring for children with COVID-19.
If your baby has COVID-19 emergency warning signs (such as trouble breathing), seek emergency care immediately. Call 911.
Bring your baby for newborn visits

@Ideally, newborn visits are done in person so that your baby’s healthcare provider can:

Check how you and your baby are doing overall.
Check your baby’s growth and feeding.
Check your baby for jaundice (yellow color in the skin or eyes).
Make sure your baby’s newborn screening tests were done (including a bloodspot, hearing test, and a test for critical congenital heart defects) and do any repeat or follow-up testing, if necessary.
Call and notify your baby’s healthcare provider before visiting, if you or your baby have COVID-19. 

Ensure safe sleep for your baby

During the COVID-19 pandemic, parents may be extra stressed and tired. 
Making sure parents and babies get enough quality sleep, is very important. 
Take steps to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) and other sleep-related deaths, by doing the following:

Place your baby on his or her back for all sleep times – naps and at night.
Use a firm, flat sleep surface, such as a mattress in a crib covered by a fitted sheet.
Have the baby share your room but not your bed. Your baby shouldn’t sleep on an adult bed, cot, air mattress, couch, or chair, whether he or she is sleeping alone, with you, or with anyone else.
Keep soft bedding, such as blankets, pillows, bumper pads, and soft toys, out of your baby’s sleep area.
Do not cover your baby’s head or allow your baby to get too hot. Signs your baby may be getting too hot include sweating or his or her chest feeling hot.
Do not smoke or allow anyone to smoke around your baby.

***People Who Live in a Nursing Home or Long-Term Care Facility

Many cases of COVID-19 in the United States have occurred among older adults living in nursing homes or long-term care facilities.

Actions to take
Carefully follow your facility’s instructions for infection prevention.
Notify staff right away if you feel sick.
Ask your caretakers about the actions that are being taken at your nursing home or long-term care facility to protect you and your loved ones, including if and how they are limiting visitors.
Symptoms
Symptoms of COVID-19 can range from mild symptoms to severe illness, sometimes resulting in death. Symptoms may appear 2–14 days after exposure.

In some cases, older adults and people of any age with underlying health conditions may have symptoms that are not typically seen in others, or they may take longer than others to develop fever and other symptoms.

Fever symptoms
In older adults, normal body temperature can be lower than in younger adults. For this reason, fever temperatures can also be lower in older adults.

If you are an older adult experiencing fever or other symptoms and want to get tested, call your healthcare provider first. You can also visit your state or local  health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing.

If you are caring for a patient aged 65 or older, be aware that a single reading higher than 100°F (37.8°C), multiple readings above 99°F (37.2°C), or a rise in temperature greater than 2°F (1.1°C) above the patient’s normal (baseline) temperature may be a sign of infection.

Why you might be at increased risk
The communal nature of nursing homes and long-term care facilities, and the population served (generally older adults often with underlying medical conditions), put those living in nursing homes at increased risk of infection and severe illness from COVID-19.

If you are a healthcare provider
If you are a healthcare provider in a nursing home or long-term care facility, make sure to take additional precautions for yourself and the older adults in your care. Viral testing for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is an important addition to other infection prevention and control practices.

***Additional COVID-19 Guidance for Caregivers of People Living with Dementia in Community Settings

Caring for People Living with Dementia in Long-term Care Facilities (LTCFs): For information on how to care for people living with dementia in LTCFs including nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, and assisted living facilities with memory care units/wings, please see CDC guidance for preparing these facilities for COVID-19.

If you care for someone living with dementia, it’s important that you know what you can do to protect yourself and others during the COVID-19 pandemic and what additional steps you can take to protect your loved one:

Know when you need to seek medical attention for your loved one.
Call a healthcare provider if your loved one has symptoms of COVID-19.4
Be aware that older adults with COVID-19 may not always have typical symptoms5 such as a fever or cough.
Use CDC’s Self-Checker1 guide to help make decisions about your loved one and know when to seek appropriate medical care.
If your loved one has advanced dementia and needs to be hospitalized for COVID-19, make sure hospital staff know that your in-person assistance might be required to communicate important health information and emergency support. Here are several important issues to consider:
Be prepared to be in a healthcare setting with your loved one. Be prepared to use personal protective measures as recommended by the hospital staff if you are in the room with your loved one.
Be aware that you and healthcare providers may face difficulties caring for your loved one because he or she:
May not cooperate with care and may not follow personal protective measures such as wearing a mask or practicing social distancing
May refuse diagnostic procedures
In this case, do as much as you can, or as much as you are allowed to, to help the person living with advanced dementia to follow CDC guidance.6

If you get sick, follow CDC guidance7 and have a backup caregiver for your loved one.
Incorporate CDC guidance into your daily routine and the daily routine of your loved one:
Wear masks8 and make sure that others wear them.
Do NOT place a mask on anyone who has trouble breathing, is unconscious, is incapacitated, or is unable to remove the mask without assistance.
Wash hands often.
Cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue.
Avoid touching eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces.
Caregivers: Be Aware of the Symptoms for COVID-19

The first step in caring for people living with dementia in any setting is to understand that changes in behavior or worsening symptoms of dementia should be evaluated because they can be an indication of COVID-19 infection or worsening stress and anxiety. Not everyone with COVID-19 has symptoms, but when people with dementia do have COVID-19 symptoms,4 they can include the following:

Increased agitation
Increased confusion
Sudden sadness
Coughing
Difficulty breathing
Fever
Chills
Repeated shaking with chills
Muscle pain
Headache
Sore throat
New loss of taste or smell
Caregivers Can Be First Responders Under Stress: Know How to Take Care of Yourself

As a caregiver,9 you provide care to people who need some degree of ongoing assistance with everyday tasks on a regular basis. During this pandemic, you may also be a first responder, providing the first line of response and defense to your loved one living with dementia. First responders often experience stress due to heavy workloads, fatigue, and other situations that come with an emergency. There are important steps you should take during and after an emergency event to help manage and cope with stress.10 To take care of others, you must be feeling well and thinking clearly. Here are some tips on how to take care of yourself:

Eat a healthy diet, avoid using drugs and alcohol, and get plenty of sleep and regular exercise to help reduce stress and anxiety. Activities as simple as taking a walk, stretching, and deep breathing can help relieve stress.
Establish and maintain a routine. Try to eat meals at regular times, and put yourself on a sleep schedule to ensure you get enough rest. Include a positive or fun activity in your schedule that you can look forward to each day or week. If possible, schedule exercise into your daily routine.
Take breaks from watching, reading, or listening to news stories, including social media. Hearing about the pandemic repeatedly can be upsetting.  If you want to stay up-to-date on the pandemic, visit CDC’s website for the latest recommendations on what you can do to protect yourself and those you care for.
Make time to unwind. Try to do activities you enjoy.
Connect with others. Reach out to family and friends. Talking to someone you trust about your concerns and feelings can help.
Call your healthcare provider if stress gets in the way of your daily activities for several days in a row.
Find a local support group. Support groups provide a safe place for you to find comfort in knowing you are not alone.
Have a backup caregiver. In case you become sick with COVID-19, a backup caregiver will ensure that your loved one continues to receive care. You can focus on caring for yourself.

***People with Moderate to Severe Asthma

This information is based on what we currently know about the spread and severity of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).

Risk of Severe Illness from COVID-19
People with moderate to severe asthma may be at higher risk of getting very sick from COVID-19.  COVID-19 can affect your nose, throat, lungs (respiratory tract); cause an asthma attack; and possibly lead to pneumonia and acute respiratory disease.

Prepare for COVID-19
Make sure that you have at least a 30-day supply of your medicines.
Take everyday precautions like washing your hands, avoiding close contact, and staying at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other people.
Wear masks in public settings and when around people who don’t live in your household.
When out in public, keep away from others and avoid crowds.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid cruise travel and non-essential air travel.
During a COVID-19 spread (outbreak) in your community, stay home as much as possible to reduce your risk of being exposed.
If someone in your home is sick, have them stay away from the rest of the household to reduce the risk of spreading the virus in your home.

***COVID-19 in Newly Resettled Refugee Populations

Refugees to the United States, especially those who are recently resettled, may experience living arrangements or working conditions that put them at greater risk of getting COVID-19. Some refugees also have limited access to health care, as well as certain underlying medical conditions that put them at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19, compared to the rest of the U.S. population.

A refugee is someone who has been forced to flee their country because of a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, or political opinion. Nearly 750,000 refugees resettled in the United States from 2008 to 2019, and thousands more have resettled since then.

Refugees are eligible for U.S. government-funded resettlement help, including healthcare benefits such as short-term health insurance for up to 8 months after arrival, and a medical exam within 90 days of arrival.

The impact of COVID-19 on the lives of resettled refugees remains unknown, as COVID-19 is a new disease. Meeting the healthcare and everyday needs of refugees, especially during health emergencies, can help keep communities safe

Guidance for Refugees Upon Arrival in the United States
Refugees come from diverse regions of the world, and professionals working with them need to understand the health risks, including the risk of COVID-19, in the countries from which they are departing. One resource is CDC’s Travel Health Notices, which are resources for travelers, including refugees, to help understand the risk of COVID-19 in destinations around the world. Learn how CDC determines the level of a destination’s COVID-19 Travel Health Notice.

Public health professionals, community organizations, resettlement agencies, and healthcare providers can assist refugees arriving in the United States by providing them with information they need to protect themselves from COVID-19.

CDC’s Welcome Booklet for Refugees provides important information to help refugees and their families stay healthy during the COVID-19 pandemic after arriving to the United States. When talking with newly arrived refugees, local refugee health partners and resettlement agency staff should reiterate concepts in the Welcome Booklet and provide them with local and state COVID-19 information and contact information for healthcare providers.
CDC’s After You Travel recommendations for inbound international travelers provide useful information for arriving refugees.

What Can Be Done for Refugee Health During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Groups that want to help refugees and those who already serve refugees can share culturally sensitive resources on COVID-19 prevention, symptoms, and self-management. The Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR) provides a list of key state contacts who can connect to these partners.

Public health professionals can:
Collect data about the sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of refugees who have COVID-19 to understand risk.
Share information and available resources about COVID-19 with partners. Work with resettlement agencies and other partners, such as employers, healthcare systems and education, faith-based, transportation, and housing organizations to find ways to break down social and economic barriers to COVID-19 prevention efforts.
Identify and secure funding for services to support refugee communities during the pandemic, such as wrap-around services for refugees in quarantine or isolation (e.g., temporary housing and child care), mobile testing, health education, and contact tracing.
Create health promotion audio and visual materials that are tailored to refugee populations. Consider featuring trusted members of the community. Create materials in different languages that are appropriate for a variety of cultures and literacy levels. Disseminate information through various channels, including via messaging apps, local radio stations, and social media, based on what is appropriate for local refugee groups.
Ensure contact tracing programs reaching refugee populations are culturally competent and incorporate training on the use of medical interpretation services. Community health workers and patient navigators familiar with working with refugees should be integrated into contact tracing programs.
Communicate (translate as needed) information about services available to refugees during the pandemic, such as food and rental assistance, and information that will impact refugees, such as school or business re-openings and executive orders.
Work with health systems and community partners to identify strategic locations within refugee communities to offer free or low-cost COVID-19 testing, such as mobile testing or testing within workplaces and faith-based institutions. These events can be promoted by trusted community leaders to encourage participation. Ensure either in-person or phone interpretation is available at testing sites.
Provide background information for healthcare professionals and health systems to understand key demographic, cultural, and health characteristics of specific refugee groups resettling in the United States and health care considerations for these populations, such as CDC’s Refugee Health Profiles and CDC’s Refugee Health Guidelines.

Community organizations and resettlement agencies can:

Share COVID-19 resources that are culturally responsive for community, work, school, and home settings. Verbal education, such as through phone or video calls, and/or communication via radio or text messages, are effective communication methods.
Engage trusted individuals within the refugee community, such as community leaders and community health workers, to support health education efforts and to deliver key prevention messages. Virtual community group meetings that integrate health education and question-and-answer (Q/A) sessions may be useful ways to convey information.
Work with refugees and explain what contract tracing is and why public health workers need to find people who have come into contact with someone who has COVID-19.
Work with community health workers in refugee communities to educate people about COVID-19, discuss strategies on how to safely isolate or quarantine within the household when needed, and link refugees to free or low-cost services.
Work across different businesses and services to connect refugees who become sick or test positive for COVID-19 with support in completing applications for unemployment benefits, food benefits, and rental/utility assistance, if needed, as well as with services such as grocery delivery or temporary housing. Ensure that refugees who are separated from their family or friends while in temporary housing facilities are able to communicate with loved ones and that their cultural needs are supported.
Work with partners to connect refugees with the healthcare and community resources they need when refugees become sick or test positive for COVID-19, including medicines, healthcare providers, and mental health services.
Help refugees get access to items to help prevent the spread of COVID-19, such as masks, soap, hand sanitizer, or household cleaners.
Employers can:
Review and put into practice CDC’s guidance for businesses and employers, reminding managers to ensure that best practices are followed.
Maintain flexible leave policies. Allow employees who are sick or who must care for others to stay home without fear of being fired or other punitive actions. Additional flexibilities might include giving advances on future sick leave days and allowing employees to donate sick leave to each other.
Allow employees to use sick leave and return from sick leave without a doctor’s note or a COVID-19 test.
Provide employees with COVID-19 prevention messages and trainings that are tailored to employees’ languages, literacy levels, and cultures.
Provide masks, hand sanitizers, handwashing stations, and personal protective equipment as appropriate.
Establish fair policies and practices for all employees to maintain physical distance between each other and customers, as possible.
Train employees at all levels of the organization to identify and interrupt all forms of discrimination; provide them with training in implicit bias .
Healthcare systems and healthcare providers can:
Ensure providers show awareness of and respect  for culture  when providing COVID-19 testing and care.
Provide language interpretation services in all relevant settings, such as phone triage and intake, inpatient units, and outpatient services.
Learn about patients’ barriers to COVID-19 prevention, testing, and control, and then work with resettlement agencies and other partners to reduce them.
Reach out to patients and gather their updated contact information, preferred method of communication, and a plan for staying in contact if someone in their home gets sick with COVID-19.
Where possible, incorporate telemedicine into healthcare settings if refugees have the means and are able to participate in virtual clinic visits. Support clinical staff, such as patient navigators, can assist with educating refugees about how to use virtual telemedicine applications.
Share resources that use a culturally sensitive approach and educate patients about COVID-19, including: symptoms and potential impacts on health, transmission (including asymptomatic transmission), how to protect oneself and others, the purpose and process of contact tracing, and how to get testing and care when needed. Where possible, reinforce key prevention messages, such as at triage.
When a patient is referred for testing, provide instructions on procedures (e.g., quarantine, isolation) to follow until they receive test results. Educate patients on what test results mean and when to discontinue quarantine or isolation. Again, this should be done with interpretation services.
Connect newly arrived refugees who have underlying medical conditions to community partners that can help them develop and continue with their care plans and help them get needed supplies and medicines.
Why Refugees May Be at Increased Risk During COVID-19 Pandemic
Due to social and economic conditions, resettled refugees face many of the same challenges that lead to poorer health for some racial and ethnic minority groups in the United States.  Refugees also face the challenges of a new healthcare system and finding health information they can understand.

Living conditions and personal circumstances

For many resettled refugees, their living conditions may make it hard to prevent getting sick with COVID-19, or to seek treatment if they do get sick.

Several generations residing in one house can make it hard to protect older family members, as well as those of any age who have certain underlying medical conditions, such as diabetes or asthma. This may also make it difficult to isolate those who are sick, especially if living space is small, such as an apartment or a small house.
Living in neighborhoods (urban or rural) that are far from health care, grocery stores or pharmacies can make it harder to get care if sick, and more difficult to stock up on medicines or other supplies.
Lack of personal transportation such as a car can make it difficult to get to healthcare facilities, work, or stores. Refugees rely on public transportation such as buses, ride share, and trains, which are limited in some areas, especially during the current pandemic.
Lack of access to television, radio, or Internet can make it difficult to get information about COVID-19. Refugees may not be able to read or understand English, and some refugees may even have limited literacy of their native language.
Not yet being integrated into the community can limit potential support and links to friends, religious leaders, or community organizations.

Work circumstances
With the help of resettlement agencies, refugees often work in entry-level jobs, where the type of work, and workplace policies, can increase the risk of getting sick with COVID-19. Two factors may increase risk:

Being a critical worker: The risk of infection may be greater for refugee workers in essential industries, such as meat-packing plants, grocery stores, and factories. These workers often are required to be at the job site despite outbreaks in their communities, and many can’t afford to stay home. Some of these kinds of jobs require public contact and close contact among fellow workers, increasing the risk of getting or spreading COVID-19.
Not having sick leave: Refugees without paid sick leave may be more likely to keep working when they are sick or be exposed to someone who is sick with COVID-19—which means that they are more likely to spread COVID-19 to other workers, including other refugees who oftentimes work in the same facilities.

Underlying medical conditions and lower access to care
Some refugees have underlying medical conditions and face barriers to healthcare, which may put them at increased risk of COVID-19. These include:

Lack of health insurance: Refugees can access healthcare in the early resettlement period, with the help of resettlement agencies. However, after their short-term health insurance expires, up to 50% of refugees may be uninsured.
Language barriers: Language barriers can affect healthcare access at every stage, from making an appointment, to relaying health concerns, to filling a prescription, or to taking medicine as prescribed. Language barriers may also prevent refugees from getting COVID-19 information that is not written using common everyday words with visuals and culturally relevant. Healthcare providers, clinics, or community groups can provide interpretation services to help fill these gaps.
Underlying medical and mental health conditions: Compared to the general U.S. population, refugees may have certain underlying medical conditions (for example, diabetes) that put them at increased risk of more severe illness from COVID-19, as well as mental health conditions (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder and depression). These conditions may be poorly controlled due to many years without regular preventative care.
Stigma and perceived discrimination: These issues may prevent refugees from seeking testing or care or being honest with their healthcare providers about their health needs.
Despite these barriers, refugees have the support of resettlement agencies, community groups, state refugee coordinators, and healthcare providers. State, local, and community response to COVID-19 should include working with these resource groups in their COVID-19 response efforts, who are trusted members of refugee communities.

***COVID-19 Questions and Answers: For People Who Use Drugs or Have Substance Use Disorder

Although the risk of severe illness from COVID-19 for people who use drugs or have substance use disorder is not known, people who use drugs may have underlying medical conditions that put them at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19, and they may have concerns and questions related to their risk.

This is an emerging, rapidly evolving situation and CDC will provide updated information as it becomes available.

***Deciding to Go Out

What you need to know
In general, the more closely you interact with others and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread.
If you decide to engage in public activities, continue to protect yourself by practicing everyday preventive actions.
Keep these items on hand when venturing out: a mask, tissues, and a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, if possible.

Understand the potential risks of going out
As communities and businesses are opening, you may be looking for ways to resume some daily activities as safely as possible. While there is no way to ensure zero risk of infection, it is important to understand potential risks and how to adopt different types of prevention measures to protect yourself and to help reduce the spread of COVID-19.

The risk of an activity depends on many factors, such as:

Is COVID-19 spreading in your community?
Will you have a potential close contact with someone who is sick or anyone who is not wearing a mask (and may be asymptomatic)?
Are you at increased risk of severe illness?
Do you take everyday actions to protect yourself from COVID-19?
CDC cannot provide the specific risk level for every activity in every community. That’s why it’s important for you to consider your own personal situation and the risk for you, your family, and your community before venturing out.

Close contact with other people increases risk
In general, the more closely you interact with others and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread. So, think about:

How many people will you interact with?

Interacting with more people raises your risk.
Being in a group with people who aren’t social distancing or wearing masks increases your risk.
Engaging with new people (e.g., those who don’t live with you) also raises your risk.
Some people have the virus and don’t have any symptoms, and it is not yet known how often people without symptoms can transmit the virus to others.

Can you keep 6 feet of space between you and others? Will you be outdoors or indoors?

The closer you are to other people who may be infected, the greater your risk of getting sick.
Keeping distance from other people is especially important for people who are at higher risk for severe illness, such as older adults and those with underlying medical conditions.
Indoor spaces are more risky than outdoor spaces where it might be harder to keep people apart and there’s less ventilation.

What’s the length of time that you will be interacting with people?

Spending more time with people who may be infected increases your risk of becoming infected.
Spending more time with people increases their risk of becoming infected if there is any chance that you may already be infected.

What makes activities safer
Activities are safer if

You can maintain at least 6 feet of space between you and others. COVID-19 spreads easier between people who are within 6 feet of each other.
They are held in outdoor spaces. Indoor spaces with less ventilation where it might be harder to keep people apart are more risky.
People are wearing masks. Interacting without wearing masks also increases your risk.

Stay home if you are sick

If you have COVID-19, have symptoms consistent with COVID-19, or have been in close contact with someone who has COVID-19, it is important to stay home and away from other people. Cases of reinfection of COVID-19 have been reported but are rare. When you can leave home and be around others depends on different factors for different situations. Follow CDC’s recommendations for your circumstances. ​

Consider the risks before you go
Asking these questions can help determine your level of risk.

Is COVID-19 spreading in my community?
Find out by viewing the latest COVID-19 information and a map of states with reported COVID-19 infections.
What are the local orders in my community?
Review updates from your local health department to better understand the situation in your community and what local orders are in place in your community. Also find out about school closures, business re-openings, and stay-at-home orders in your state.
Will my activity put me in close contact with others?
Practice social distancing because COVID-19 spreads mainly among people who are in close contact with others.

It’s important that you and the people around you wear a mask when in public and particularly when it’s difficult to stay 6 feet away from others consistently.
Choose outdoor activities and places where it’s easy to stay 6 feet apart, like parks and open-air facilities.
Look for physical barriers, like plexiglass screens or modified layouts, that help you keep your distance from others.
Use visual reminders—like signs, chair arrangements, markings on the floor, or arrows—to help remind you to keep your distance from others.
Am I at risk for severe illness?
Older adults and people of any age who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19. While the risk for severe illness is lower for others, everyone faces some risk of illness. Some people have no symptoms, others have mild symptoms, and some get severely ill.
Do I live with someone who is at risk for severe illness?
If you live with older adults or someone with certain underlying medical conditions, then you and all family members should take extra precautions to minimize risk. Learn more about what you can do if you or any members of your family are at higher risk of severe illness from COVID-19.
Do I practice everyday preventive actions?
Continue to protect yourself by practicing everyday preventive actions, like monitoring yourself for symptoms, not touching your face with unwashed hands, washing your hands often, social distancing, disinfecting surfaces, wearing masks, and staying home if you are sick.
Will I have to share any items, equipment, or tools with other people?
Choose places where there is limited sharing of items and where any items that are shared are thoroughly cleaned and disinfected between uses.  You can also choose to visit places that share, post, or announce that they have increased cleaning and disinfection to protect others from COVID-19.
Will I need to take public transportation to get to the activity?
Public transit can put you in close contact with others. When using public transportation, follow CDC’s guidance on how to protect yourself when using transportation
Does my activity require travel to another community?
Before considering  trips outside your community, consult CDC’s travel considerations.
If I get sick with COVID-19, will I have to miss work or school? 
If you are sick with COVID-19, stay home. Also find out about your work or school’s telework or sick leave policy.
Do I know what to do if I get sick?
Know the steps to help prevent the spread of COVID-19 if you are sick.

Be prepared and stay safe
If you decide to engage in public activities, continue to protect yourself by practicing everyday preventive actions.

Items to have on hand

A mask
Tissues
Hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, if possible

***Participate in Outdoor and Indoor Activities

If you want to spend time with people who don’t live with you, outdoors is the safer choice! You are less likely to be exposed to COVID-19 during outdoor activities, even without the use of masks, when you

Stay at least 6 feet apart from people who don’t live with you
Limit your time around others

Remember
Bring a mask with you to put on when you encounter people who may get closer than 6 feet
Follow local mask mandates

Indoor Activities
If you want to make indoor activities safer

Pick uncrowded, well ventilated places
Stay at least 6 feet apart
Wear your mask correctly and consistently
Limit the amount of time you spend with others

Why Outside is a Safer Choice
COVID-19 spreads more easily indoors than outdoors. Studies show that people are more likely to be exposed to COVID-19 when they are closer than 6 feet apart from others for longer periods of time.

You are more likely to be exposed to COVID-19 when you

Attend crowded, poorly ventilated indoor events
Have close contact with infected people at home
You are less likely to be exposed to COVID-19 when you

Attend outdoor activities
Stay at least 6 feet apart
Limit the amount of time spent with people who don’t live with you

Things you can do to be safer
Wear a mask consistently and correctly over your nose and mouth
Stay at least 6 feet apart from people who don’t live with you
Avoid crowds
Avoid places that are poorly ventilated or crowded
Wash your hands

***Returning to Work

What you need to know
In general, the more closely you interact with others and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread.
If you return to work, continue to protect yourself by practicing everyday preventive actions.
Keep these items on hand when returning to work: a mask, tissues, and hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, if possible.

Considerations for returning to work
Do you have or think you might have COVID-19, or have you been around someone who has the virus?
If you have or think you might have COVID-19, you should isolate, whether or not you have symptoms. Learn what isolation means and when you can be around others after being sick.
If you might have been exposed to COVID-19, you should stay home. This is called quarantine. Learn when to start and end quarantine.
Are you or someone in your household at increased risk of severe illness? You may need to take extra precautions.
If you are at increased risk for severe illness, check with your employer to see if there are policies and practices in place to reduce your risk at work, like telework or modified job responsibilities.
Are you the primary caregiver for your child or someone else? If so, here are some things to think about:
If someone else will be taking care of your child, ask them to review information about caring for children.
If someone else will be providing care for a household member that is at increased risk of severe illness or needs extra precautions, ask them to review this information.
Are there ways you can minimize the number of people you interact with?
In addition to any measures your business may have implemented to reduce your risk (e.g., installed barriers), take additional steps to minimize the number of people you interact with.
Interacting with more people raises your risk since some people may have the virus and not know it since they have no symptoms.
Can you have virtual meetings to limit the number of in-person interactions?
When interacting with other people, are policies in place for colleagues or customers to wear a mask and to keep 6 feet of space between others?
What’s the length of time that you will be interacting with people?
Spending more time with people who may be infected increases your risk of becoming infected.
Spending more time with people increases their risk of becoming infected if there is any chance that you may already be infected.

Protect yourself and others in the workplace
Stay home when needed

If you have or think you have symptoms or have tested positive for COVID-19, stay home and find out what to do if you are sick and find out when you can be around others.
If you are well, but you have a sick family member or recently had close contact with someone with COVID-19, notify your supervisor and follow CDC recommended precautions.
Monitor your health

Be alert for symptoms. Watch for fever, cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19.
This is especially important if you are running essential errands, going into the office or workplace, and in settings where it may be difficult to keep a physical distance of 6 feet.
Take your temperature if symptoms develop.
Don’t take your temperature within 30 minutes of exercising or after taking medications that could lower your temperature, like acetaminophen.
Follow CDC guidance if symptoms develop.
Wear a mask

Wear a mask in public settings, especially where staying 6 feet apart (about two arm lengths) is not possible. Interacting without wearing a mask increases your risk of getting infected.
Wearing a mask does not replace the need to practice social distancing.
Wear masks to help keep from getting and spreading COVID-19.
Social distance in shared spaces

Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
Maintain at least 6 feet of distance between you and others. COVID-19 spreads easier between people who are within 6 feet of each other.
Keeping distance from other people is especially important for people who are at increased risk for severe illness, such as older adults and those with certain medical conditions.
Indoor spaces are more risky than outdoor spaces where it might be harder to keep people apart and there’s less ventilation.
Avoid close contact with others on your commute to work, if possible. Consider biking, walking, driving either alone or with other members of your household. Learn how to protect yourself when using transportation to commute to work.
Wash your hands often

Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not available. If your hands are visibly dirty, use soap and water over hand sanitizer.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth if you haven’t washed your hands.
Cover your coughs and sneezes

Remember to cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze, or use the inside of your elbow. Throw used tissues into no-touch trash cans and immediately wash hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
If soap and water are not available, use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid sharing objects and equipment

Avoid using other employees’ phones, desks, offices, or other work tools and equipment, when possible. If you cannot avoid using someone else’s workstation, clean and disinfect before and after use.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and objects

Clean and disinfect frequently touched objects and surfaces, like workstations, keyboards, telephones, handrails, and doorknobs. Dirty surfaces can be cleaned with soap and water before disinfection.
Choose the right disinfectant for your surface from EPA’s List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19)

Returning to work after quarantine or isolation
Quarantine keeps someone who might have been exposed to the virus away from others. Learn when to start and end quarantine.

Isolation separates someone who is infected with the virus from others. Learn when you can be around others after being sick.

Cases of reinfection of COVID-19 have been reported but are rare. In general, reinfection means a person was infected (got sick) once, recovered, and then later became infected again. Based on what we know from similar viruses, some reinfections are expected.

***Running Essential Errands

What you need to know
Stay home if sick.
Use online services when available.
Wear masks in public settings and when around people who don’t live in your household, especially when other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Use social distancing (stay at least 6 feet away from others).
Use hand sanitizer after leaving stores.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds when you get home.

Grocery Shopping
Stay home if sick

Avoid shopping if you are sick or have symptoms of COVID-19, which include a fever, cough, or shortness of breath.

Order online or use curbside pickup

If possible, limit visiting the grocery store, or other stores selling household essentials, in person. In general, the more closely you interact with others and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread.
Order groceries and other items online for home delivery or curbside pickup (if possible) or check with your local grocery store to see if pre-order or drive-up options are available.
 

Protect yourself while shopping

Wear a mask in public settings and when around people who don’t live in your household, especially when social is distancing is difficult.
When you do have to visit in person, go during hours when fewer people will be there (for example, early morning or late night).
If you are at higher risk for severe illness, find out if the store has special hours for people at higher risk. If they do, try to shop during those hours.
If you normally bring your own reusable shopping bags, ensure they are cleaned before each use. Some locations have temporarily banned the use of reusable shopping bags during the COVID-19 pandemic, so check your state, local, store or market policies before bringing reusable bags.
Disinfect the shopping cart, use disinfecting wipes if available.
Do not touch your eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
Stay at least 6 feet away from others while shopping and in lines.
Use marked entry or exit points and follow any directional signs or floor markings designed to keep people at least 6 feet apart.
Only touch products that you plan to purchase, if possible.
Consider not consuming any sample or purchase food or drink items from self-service stations.
If possible, use touchless payment (pay without touching money, a card, or a keypad). If you must handle money, a card, or use a keypad, use hand sanitizer right after paying.

Practice hand hygiene

Before entering and after exiting the grocery store or market, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
When you get home, and before preparing or eating food, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.

Unpack safely at home

Currently, the risk of infection from SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, from food products, food packaging, or bags is thought to be low. However, it is always important to follow good food safety practices.
When unpacking groceries, refrigerate or freeze meat, poultry, eggs, seafood, and other perishables within 2 hours of purchasing.
Do NOT use disinfectants designed for hard surfaces, such as bleach or ammonia, on food packaged in cardboard or plastic wrap.
After unpacking groceries, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Regularly clean and disinfect kitchen counters using a product from EPA’s List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19) 

Shopping at farmer’s markets or open-air markets

If you are shopping at farmer’s markets or open-air markets, follow the general principles listed under Grocery Shopping, plus the following:

Cover your mouth and nose with a mask , practice hand hygiene, maintain social distancing, and unpack safely at home.

Deliveries & Takeout
Limit in person contact if possible

Pay online or on the phone when you order (if possible).
Accept deliveries without in-person contact whenever possible. Ask for deliveries to be left in a safe spot outside your house (such as your front porch or lobby), with no person-to-person interaction. Otherwise, stay at least 6 feet away from the delivery person.

Meal Kits and Delivery

Because of COVID-19 outbreak, some deliveries have been delayed
If you have a meal kit or prepared meal delivery, check the temperature of the food immediately after it is delivered.
The only way to know the food is safe to eat is to use a food thermometer to make sure the food is 40°F or below.
Refrigerate or freeze your delivery as soon as possible.
For more information about meal kits and delivery good safety, see Tips for Meal Kit and Food Delivery Safety.

Wash your hands or use hand sanitizer after accepting deliveries or collecting mail

After receiving your delivery or bringing home your takeout food, wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
After collecting mail from a post office or home mailbox, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.

Banking

Bank online whenever possible

Ask about options for telephone or virtual meetings to use banking services.
Use drive-thru banking services, automated teller machines (ATM), or mobile banking apps for routine transactions that do not require face-to-face assistance as much as possible.
Look for any extra prevention practices being implemented by the bank, such as plexiglass barriers for tellers or bankers, staff wearing masks, or physical distancing signs in the lobby.
Wear a mask when doing any in-person exchanges and unable to stay at least 6 feet apart from other people – and make sure that bank employees and other people inside the bank are also wearing cloth face coverings.
Use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol after any deposit, withdrawal, exchange, drive-thru visit, or use of an ATM.
Wash your hands thoroughly when you arrive home or to your destination where a restroom is available.

Getting Gas
Use disinfecting wipes on handles or buttons

Use disinfecting wipes on handles and buttons before you touch them (if available).
After fueling, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol. Wash your hands for at least 20 seconds when you get home or somewhere with soap and water.

***Protect Yourself When Using Transportation

Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​
As schools, businesses, and community organizations continue to provide essential services during the pandemic, follow these guidelines to protect yourself and slow the spread of COVID-19 when using transportation. See CDC’s tips for how to stay safe while running errands.

Everyone, especially those at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19, and people who live with them, should avoid non-essential travel. Travel increases your chance of spreading and getting COVID-19. CDC recommends that you do not travel at this time. Postpone travel and stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19. Some people should not travel. People who are sick, have recently tested positive for COVID-19, or have been exposed to a person with COVID-19 pose a very high risk to others during travel.

People can take steps to prevent getting and spreading COVID-19 to protect themselves, their communities, and people who are at increased risk of severe illness. Wear a mask. Stay 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from others. Avoid crowds and poorly ventilated places. Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.

This guidance provides information on using transportation within your local community to accomplish everyday activities. Find information about traveling outside of your local community (air travel, RV travel, etc.) here.
car bus icon
For all types of transportation
When using any type of transportation, follow these general principles:

Wear Masks.

Wear a mask covering your nose and mouth at all times in public settings and inside any public or private vehicle or mode of transport when around people who do not live in your household, especially when physical distancing is difficult. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations. This requirement includes taxis and rideshares as well.
The following categories of people are exempt from the requirement to wear a mask:
A child under the age of 2 years;
A person with a disability who cannot wear a mask, or cannot safely wear a mask, for reasons related to the disability;
A person for whom wearing a mask would create a risk to workplace health, safety, or job duty as determined by the relevant workplace safety guidelines or federal regulations.
By a person for whom wearing a mask would create a risk to workplace health, safety, or job duty as determined by the relevant workplace safety guidelines or federal regulations. Your mask helps to protect those around you in case you are infected, even if you are not showing symptoms, while offering some protection for you too.
Practice physical distancing.

During travel, avoid crowds and keep at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from people who are not in your household — for example, when you are waiting at a bus station or selecting seats on a train.
Practice hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette.

Before you use any type of transportation, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Once you reach your destination, wash your hands again with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol as soon as possible upon arrival.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
Cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze. Throw used tissues in the trash and wash your hands immediately with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Stay home when possible.

People who are sick, have tested positive for COVID-19, or who have recently had a close contact (closer than 6 feet for at least 15 minutes combined over a 24-hour period) to a person with COVID-19 should not use transportation options that may put them in close contact with others (for example, public transit, rideshare, or taxis) and should stay home except to seek medical care. If they need to travel for medical care, they should travel by ambulance or private vehicle. If they use transportation services for medical needs, they should call ahead to notify the service of their illness so they can take precautions to protect the driver and other staff. No other passengers should share the vehicle.
If you are sick and public transportation is your only option when seeking medical care, wear a mask over your nose and mouth, practice physical distancing (staying at least 6 feet away from other people as much as possible), and practice hand hygiene, including using hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol if soap and water are not readily available. For non-emergency medical care, make an appointment ahead of time and, if using public transportation, travel during non-peak hours, if possible.
Have adequate supplies

Before traveling, pack sanitizing wipes and hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol (in case you are unable to wash your hands at your destination).
Bring your mask to wear at all times —especially while riding on a train or bus, waiting at a rest stop, or riding in a car with people outside your household.
Bring extra masks in case your mask gets wet or dirty and a plastic bag that can be sealed to store wet or dirty masks.
Protect people at risk for severe illness from COVID-19.

Everyone, especially those who have an increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19, should avoid non-essential travel.
subway light icon
Public transit
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Assure that the mask is being worn properly. Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​ Wearing a face mask while on public conveyances and at transportation hubs is required.
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following:

Stay up-to-date.

Stay informed about federal mask requirements on public transit.
Check with local transit authorities for the latest information on changes to services and procedures, especially if you might need additional assistance.
Practice physical distancing.

When possible, consider traveling during non-peak hours when there are likely to be fewer people.
Follow physical distancing guidelines by staying at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from people who are not from your household. For example:
Avoid gathering in groups, and stay out of crowded spaces when possible, especially at transit stations and stops.
Consider skipping a row of seats between yourself and other riders if possible.
Enter and exit buses through rear entry doors if possible.
Look for physical distancing instructions or physical guides offered by transit authorities (for example, floor decals or signs indicating where to stand or sit to remain at least 6 feet or about 2 arm lengths apart from others).
Practice hand hygiene.

After you leave the transit station or stop, use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol, or wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
When you arrive at your destination, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid touching surfaces.

As much as possible, limit touching frequently touched surfaces such as kiosks, digital interfaces such as touchscreens and fingerprint scanners, ticket machines, turnstiles, handrails, restroom surfaces, elevator buttons, and benches.
If you must touch these surfaces, as soon as you can, wash your hands for 20 seconds with soap and water or properly apply alcohol-based  sanitizer containing 60% alcohol, by rubbing the gel all over all surfaces of your hands and fingers until your hands are dry.
Stay informed about how to select and use hand sanitizer.
Use touchless payment and no-touch trash cans and doors when available. Exchange cash or credit cards by placing them in a receipt tray or on the counter rather than by hand, if possible.
Do not eat or drink on public transit.

Refrain from eating or drinking on public transit to ensure mask use at all times. Plan to eat and drink outside of the vehicle when you are not near other people.
If you would like to eat or drink after exiting the public transportation, be sure to find a space at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) away from other people and wash your hands with soap and water or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol before eating or drinking and before removing your mask or touching your face.
Stay informed about how to wear and safely remove masks before eating.
taxi icon
Rideshare, carpool, taxi, limo for-hire vehicle passengers
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following:

Stay up-to-date.

Stay informed about federal mask requirements that apply to ridesharing.
Avoid riding with unmasked drivers or passengers.

Avoid a vehicle in which the driver or other passengers are not properly using masks covering their nose and mouth.
Practice physical distancing.

Limit the number of passengers in the vehicle to only those who need to travel with you.
Avoid shared rides where multiple passengers are picked up who are not in the same household.
Sit in the back seat in larger vehicles, such as vans and buses, so you can remain at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) away, or as far as possible, from the driver. When possible, sit in the rear seat diagonally across from the driver.
Improve ventilation.

Ask the driver to improve the ventilation in the vehicle if possible — for example, by opening the windows or setting the air ventilation/air conditioning on non-recirculation mode.
Avoid touching surfaces.

Avoid contact with surfaces frequently touched by passengers or drivers, such as the door frame and handles, windows, and other vehicle parts. In circumstances where such contact is unavoidable, use a hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol or soap and water as soon as possible afterwards.
Avoid accepting offers of free water bottles and avoid touching magazines or other items that may be provided for free to passengers.
Use touchless payment when available.
Practice hand hygiene.

After leaving the vehicle, use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
When you arrive at your destination, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
Do not eat or drink when using rideshare.

Refrain from eating or drinking in a rideshare vehicle to ensure mask use at all times. Plan to eat and drink outside of the vehicle when you are not near other people.
If you would like to eat or drink after exiting a rideshare vehicle, be sure to find a space at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) away from other people and wash your hands with soap and water or use hand sanitizer before eating or drinking and before removing your mask or touching your face.
bicycle light icon
Shared automobiles, rental cars, scooters, skateboards, and other micro-mobility devices
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following:

Cleaning and disinfecting.

Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces regularly (for example, the steering wheel, gear shift, door frame/handles, windows, radio/temperature dials, handlebars, gears, braking handles, locks, and seatbelt buckles) or shared equipment before you use it. Use disinfecting wipes if available.
When using parking meters and pay stations, consider using alcohol wipes to disinfect surfaces or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol after use. Wash hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds as soon as it is possible.

Avoid touching surfaces and use touchless payment when available and if applicable.
Practice hand hygiene. After completing your trip, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
car side light icon
Personal vehicles
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following:

Practice physical distancing.

Limit the number of passengers in the vehicle to only those necessary (for example, choose one or two family members who are not at higher risk for severe illness to run the essential errands).
Improve ventilation.

Improve the ventilation in the vehicle if possible (for example, open the windows or set the air ventilation/air conditioning on non-recirculation mode). If using a rental car, make sure to ventilate the vehicle during use.
Sanitize surfaces.

If using a rental car, sanitize the door handles, steering wheel, and other surfaces before use.
shuttle van icon
Paratransit services
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.​ If using paratransit services, call ahead to notify the service of your illness so they can take precautions to protect the driver and other staff.
Paratransit services are van and taxi programs for people who are unable to independently use public transportation because of a disability or disabling health condition. The Americans with Disabilities Act   requires public transit agencies that provide fixed-route service to provide paratransit services to qualified people with disabilities. Paratransit transportation is considered an essential service, which can help people with disabilities engage in activities to support their health and safety, such as visiting a healthcare professional and obtaining food, medications, and medical supplies.

Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following:

Stay up to date.

Contact your local paratransit program for the latest information on changes to paratransit services and procedures.
Wear masks.

Wear a mask covering your nose and mouth in public settings and in vehicles when around people who don’t live in your household, especially when physical distancing is difficult.
The following categories of people are exempt from the requirement to wear a mask:
A child under the age of 2 years;
A person with a disability who cannot wear a mask, or cannot safely wear a mask, for reasons related to the disability;
A person for whom wearing a mask would create a risk to workplace health, safety, or job duty as determined by the relevant workplace safety guidelines or federal regulations.
Practice physical distancing.

When possible, consider traveling during non-peak hours when there are likely to be fewer passengers.
When possible, sit in the back of larger vehicles such as vans so you can remain at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) away from the driver and other passengers during the trip.
As much as possible, limit close contact with the driver. It may not be possible to stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) away from the driver at all times. Ask the driver to wear a mask covering their nose and mouth and to practice proper hand hygiene immediately before and after providing assistance.
Improve ventilation.

Ask the driver to improve the ventilation in the vehicle if possible, such as opening the windows or setting the air ventilation/air conditioning on non-recirculation mode.
Avoid touching surfaces.

Avoid contact with surfaces frequently touched by passengers or drivers, such as the door frame and handles, windows, and other vehicle parts.  In circumstances where such contact is unavoidable, use a hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol as soon as possible afterwards.
Practice hand hygiene.

After leaving the vehicle, use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
When you arrive at your destination, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
wheelchair solid icon
Personal bikes, walking, wheelchair rolling, or moving with mobility assistive devices
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following:

Practice physical distancing.

Follow physical distancing guidelines by staying at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other cyclists or pedestrians who are not from your household. For example:
Avoid crowded and/or narrow routes where it might be difficult to maintain 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) of distance between yourself and other cyclists or pedestrians.
If you see someone moving towards you, stay as far to your right if possible or safely cross the street to avoid passing within 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) of another person.
When passing others, leave as much space as possible.
Wear masks.

Wear a mask covering your nose and mouth at all times in public settings and when around people who don’t live in your household.
Even if you do not expect to have close contact (within 6 feet or about 2 arm lengths) with other people during your trip, carry a mask so you are prepared.
If you are able to wear a mask during vigorous biking or other activities, remove your mask if it gets moist from sweat and replace it with a clean mask. If you need to remove your mask to breathe sufficiently, and whenever breathing heavily, it is especially important to maintain physical distance of at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from others.
Avoid touching surfaces.

Limit touching surfaces that are frequently touched by other people, such as pedestrian or cyclist call buttons, as much as possible. If you must touch these surfaces, as soon as you can, wash your hands for 20 seconds with soap and water or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
Practice hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette.

After completing your trip, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid spitting or clearing nasal passages in public.
user icon
People with transportation-related jobs
If transportation is part of your job, see these additional resources on how to protect yourself from COVID-19 at work.

***Large Gatherings

COVID-19 Cases are Extremely High. Avoid Events and Gatherings

COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths are extremely high across the United States. To decrease your chance of getting and spreading COVID-19, CDC recommends that you do not gather with people who do not live with you at this time. Attending events and gatherings increases your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19. Stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

Travel to Large Gatherings
Travel may increase your chance of spreading and getting COVID-19 due to exposure at airports, on public transit, or in hotels. CDC continues to recommend postponing travel and staying home, as this is currently the best way to protect yourself and others.

If you are considering traveling, visit  Domestic Travel during the COVID-19 Pandemic to help you decide what is best for you and your family.

If you plan to attend a large gathering, those held outdoors are safer than indoor gatherings. Stay home if you are sick or have been near someone who thinks they may have or have been exposed to COVID-19.

Steps Everyone Can Take to Make Large Gatherings Safer
The more steps you can take, the safer you will be at the gathering. No one measure is enough to prevent the spread of COVID-19.

Wear a mask
Wear a mask with two or more layers to stop the spread of COVID-19 to protect yourself and others.
Wear your mask over your nose and mouth, secure it under your chin, and make sure it fits snugly against the sides of your face.
In cold weather, wear your mask under your scarf, ski mask, or balaclava.
Keep a spare mask in case your mask becomes wet from moisture in your breath or from snow or rain.

Stay at least 6 feet away from people who do not live with you
You are more likely to get or spread COVID-19 when you are in close contact with people who don’t live with you.
Remember that people without symptoms or with a recent negative test result can still spread COVID-19 to others.
Choose safer outdoor venues if possible.
Choose venues that limit seating and allow for social distancing and select your seat or place to stand based on your ability to stay at least 6 feet from others.
Arrive to the event early or at off-peak times to avoid crowding and congested areas.
Avoid using restroom facilities or concession areas at high traffic times, such as intermission, half-time, or immediately after the event.

Avoid crowded, poorly ventilated indoor spaces
As much as possible, avoid crowds and indoor spaces that do not offer fresh air from the outdoors.

You are less likely to get or spread COVID-19 during outdoor activities. Look for seating options that are outside or have proper ventilation with outdoor air, such as tents that have open doors or rolled up sides.

Wash your hands
Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing and before eating.
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Bring extra hand sanitizer with you.
Avoid touching your mask, eyes, nose, and mouth.

Get Your Flu and COVID-19 Shots
Get your flu and COVID-19 shots as soon as possible.

Do not get the shots at the same time. Get them at least 14 days apart.
The flu shot can help protect you and your family, friends, and community from getting and spreading flu.
By getting a flu shot, you can also help lower hospital visits and serious health problems from flu.

Safer Large Gatherings
Choose Safer Large Gatherings

Gathering virtually or with the people you live with is the safest choice.

Have a virtual gathering
Attend a virtual concert or show with friends and family.
Host a virtual family party or reunion.
Watch a sporting event with people you live with.
Attend online conferences instead of in person events.
Attend a virtual religious ceremony or celebration.


If you do gather with people who don’t live with you, gatherings and activities held outdoors are safer than indoor gatherings.
Attend an outdoor concert where attendees are wearing masks and staying 6 feet apart.
Watch an outdoor sporting event where you are seated more than 6 feet away from others.
Attend a front yard neighborhood BBQ where each neighbor gathers in his or her yard and brings his or her own food.
Attend a drive-in event.

Know public safety measures in place at the venue
Check with the organizer or event venue for updated information about any COVID-19 safety guidelines.
Choose events that take place outside with enough space for attendees to stay at least 6 feet apart.
Use touchless payment methods and ticketing apps. If not possible, exchange cash, card or tickets by placing payment in a receipt tray, if available, or on the counter.

Follow food safety measures
Eat outdoors, if possible. You are less likely to get or spread COVID-19 during outdoor activities.
Wear masks at all times except when you are actively eating or drinking. Masks help protect both you and those around you.

Limit alcohol consumption. Consuming alcohol may make you less likely to follow COVID-19 safety measures.
Minimize the time you spend in the restaurant, bar or concession area. The longer you stay, the more you increase your risk.
Bring your own food, drinks, plates, cups, utensils, and condiment packets, if possible.
Use single-use options, like salad dressing and condiment packets, and disposable items like food containers, plates, and utensils.
Avoid self-serve and buffet style food options.
Use a touchless garbage can, if available.

What to do if You Become Sick after Attending a Large Gathering
Get tested for COVID-19. You can visit your state or health department’s website to look for the latest local information on testing.
Know when to quarantine. Attending a large gathering or event increases your chance of being in close contact with people outside your household and being exposed to COVID-19. If you had close contact with people you don’t live with:
Stay home for 14 days after your last contact with a person who has COVID-19.
Watch for fever (100.4°F), cough, shortness of breath, or other symptoms of COVID-19.
If possible, stay away from others, especially people who are at higher risk for getting very sick from COVID-19.

***Small Gatherings
COVID-19 Cases are Extremely High. Avoid Events and Gatherings

COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths are extremely high across the United States. To decrease your chance of getting and spreading COVID-19, CDC recommends that you do not gather with people who do not live with you at this time. Attending events and gatherings increases your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19. Stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

Travel to Small Gatherings
Travel increases your chance of spreading and getting COVID-19 due to potential exposures on public transit, at airports, or in hotels. CDC continues to recommend postponing travel and staying home, as this is the best way to protect yourself and others this year.

Visit the Domestic Travel during the COVID-19 Pandemic to help you to evaluate your risk and decide what is best for you and your family.

Steps Everyone Can Take to Make Small Gatherings Safer

Wear a mask
Wear a mask with two or more layers to stop the spread of COVID-19 to protect yourself and others.
Wear your mask over your nose and mouth, secure it under your chin, and make sure it fits snugly against the sides of your face.
Masks should be worn indoors and outdoors except when eating or drinking.
In cold weather, wear your mask under your scarf, ski mask, or balaclava.
Keep a spare mask in case your mask becomes wet from moisture in your breath or from snow or rain.

Stay at least 6 feet away from others who do not live with you
You are more likely to get or spread COVID-19 when you are in close contact with others
Remember that people without symptoms or with a recent negative test result can still spread COVID-19 to others.
Guests should avoid direct contact, including handshakes and hugs, with others not from their household.

Avoid crowded, poorly ventilated indoor spaces
Avoid crowds and indoors spaces that do not offer fresh air from the outdoors. If indoors, bring in fresh air by opening windows and doors, if possible.
For additional information on increasing ventilation, visit CDC’s information on Improving Ventilation in Your Home.

Wash your hands
Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after you have been in a public place, after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing and before eating.
Make sure to dry your hands completely using a clean towel or by air drying.
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid touching your mask, eyes, nose, and mouth.

Have a virtual gathering
The safest way to gather is at home with the people you live with. Here are some ideas for safely connecting with friends and family.

Schedule a time to eat a meal together virtually and have people show their main dish, vegetable, or dessert.
Gather virtually for a game, trivia, or activity
Host a virtual dance party with music.
Plan a virtual movie party.

Safer Small Gatherings
Gathering virtually or with the people you live with is the safest choice.

If you do gather with people who don’t live with you, gatherings and activities held outdoors are safer than indoor gatherings.

Attending a Gathering
In addition to following the steps that everyone can take to make the gatherings safer, take these additional steps:

Have conversations with the host ahead of time to understand expectations for celebrating together.
Bring your own food, drinks, plates, cups, utensils, and condiment packets.
Wear a mask indoors and outdoors.
Avoid shouting, cheering loudly, or singing. Clap, stomp your feet, or bring (or provide) hand-held noisemakers instead.
Stay home if you are sick or have been near someone who thinks they may have or have been exposed to COVID-19.
It’s okay if you decide to stay home and remain apart from others. Do what’s best for you.

Hosting a Small Gathering
Check the COVID-19 infection rates in areas where guests live to consider whether it is safe to hold or attend a gathering. If you choose to have guests at your home, make sure that everyone follows the steps to make gatherings safer. Here are tips to help you make your gathering safer:

Have conversations with guests ahead of time to set expectations for a safe gathering.
Limit the number of guests to allow people to remain at least 6 feet apart.
Host outdoor gatherings when possible with family and friends who live in your community.
Encourage everyone to use masks and have extra unused masks available for your guests.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and items between use.
If gathering indoors, increase ventilation by opening windows and doors or by placing central air and heating on continuous circulation.
Encourage guests to wash hands often. Have a separate space for guests to wash their hands or provide hand sanitizer.
Keep background music volume low so guests don’t need to shout.
Clean and disinfect commonly touched surfaces and any shared items.
Cancel your gathering if you or someone who lives with you is sick or has been near someone who thinks they have or has COVID-19.

Planning for Food and Drinks
There is no evidence that handling or eating food spreads COVID-19, but it is always important to follow food safety practices.

Encourage guests to bring food and drinks for their household.
Limit people going in and out of the food preparation areas.
Have one person serve all the food.
Use single-use options, like salad dressings, food containers, plates and utensils, and condiments.
Limit crowding in areas where food is served.
Offer no-touch trash cans for guests to easily throw away food items.
Wash dishes in the dishwasher or with hot soapy water immediately following the gathering.

Steps to take if exposed to COVID-19 during a gathering
If you are exposed to COVID-19 at a gathering, while traveling, or at any time, take steps to protect yourself and others.
If you develop symptoms consistent with COVID-19 within 14 days of the gathering, such as fever, cough, or shortness of breath, or if you test positive for COVID-19, immediately notify the host and others who attended.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, a public health worker may contact you to check on your health and to identify and support contacts who may have been infected. Your information will be confidential. 

***Personal and Social Activities
COVID-19 Cases are Extremely High. Avoid Events and Gatherings
COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths are extremely high across the United States. To decrease your chance of getting and spreading COVID-19, CDC recommends that you do not gather with people who do not live with you at this time. Attending events and gatherings increases your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19. Stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

What you need to know

Continue to take these steps to reduce your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19:

Correctly and consistently wear a mask that completely covers your nose and mouth
Stay at least 6 feet away from others who do not live with you
Avoid crowds
Avoid poorly ventilated indoor spaces
Stay home when you are sick
Wash your hands frequently with soap and water for at least 20 seconds (or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol)
Get vaccinated when the vaccine is available to you
Get tested if you have signs or symptoms of COVID-19, or if you think you may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19
Even if you and others (including children) do not feel sick and do not have any symptoms, you can still spread COVID-19 to family, friends, and community.

Do NOT be around others if you have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, if you are sick, or if you have tested positive for COVID-19.

Stay home if sick.
Wear masks in public settings, at events and gatherings, and anywhere they will be around other people.
Effective February 2, 2021, masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
Use social distancing (stay at least 6 feet away from others).
Before you go, call and ask what extra prevention strategies they are using, like requiring staff to wear masks.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds when you get home.

Visiting a restaurant or bar

The COVID-19 pandemic has been stressful and isolating for many people. Many go to restaurants and bars to enjoy a meal without having to cook, to connect with friends and family, and to support businesses that are an important part of many communities.

However, visiting bars and restaurants can increase you risk of getting and spreading COVID-19.

Why Visiting Restaurants and Bars May Increase Risk

In a recent study, scientists found that adults with positive COVID-19 test results were twice as likely to have reported dining at a restaurant than those with negative COVID-19 test results.1 There are many factors that may explain why going to restaurants and bars increases your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19:
People from different households are gathering in the same space.
Eating and drinking requires the removal of a mask.
If eating indoors, ventilation flow in restaurants and bars can cause droplets to spread at distances greater than 6 feet.2 Poor ventilation can also increase risk as it may cause the virus to accumulate in the air.
Physical distancing of at least 6 feet is often difficult to maintain in restaurants and bars.
People need to talk louder in restaurants and bars to hear one another. This can contribute to the production of more virus aerosols.
Use of alcohol may alter judgment and make it more difficult for people to practice COVID-19 safety measures.


While the safest way to enjoy and support restaurants and bars is to take out food and eat it at home with people who live with you, there are ways that you can go to a restaurant and bar and still reduce your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19.

Check the restaurant’s or bar’s COVID-19 prevention practices before you go

Check if outdoor seating is available and if options allow groups to be at least 6 feet apart from one another. If a tent is set-up outdoors, make sure that at least one side is open or rolled up. An enclosed tent is like eating indoors.
Avoid busy times of day or night. It’s safest to visit when fewer people are at the restaurant or bar.
Check the restaurant or bar’s website and social media to see if you feel comfortable with their COVID-19 safety guidelines. Guidelines should require both staff and patrons to wear masks while not eating or drinking. Check if menus are available online or via app for safer ordering. Call if the posted information is unclear or if you have questions.
Find out if valet parking is required or if you can self-park. If valet is the only option, it’s best to leave your windows open and let your car air out for at least 15 minutes after the valet returns your car to you.
Take steps to protect yourself at the restaurant or bar

Eat outdoors, if possible. You are less likely to get or spread COVID-19 during outdoor activities. Look for seating options that are outside and have proper ventilation of outdoor air, such as tents that have open doors or rolled up sides.
Wear masks at all times, both indoors and outdoors, except when you are actively eating or drinking. Masks help protect both you and those around you.
Avoid crowds and sit at tables spaced at least 6 feet apart from people you don’t live with, both indoors and outdoors. If you are standing, stay at least 6 feet apart from those who do not live with you.
Limit alcohol consumption. Consuming alcohol may make you less likely to follow COVID-19 safety measures.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds before eating and when exiting the restaurant or bar. If soap and water are not readily available, use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Ask for individual condiment and salt and pepper packets, as the condiments on the table may not be cleaned between patrons.
Minimize the time you spend in the restaurant or bar. The longer you stay, the more you increase your risk

Hosting gatherings or cook-outs

Remind guests to stay home if they are sick

Remind invited guests to stay home if they have been exposed to COVID-19 in the last 14 days or are showing COVID-19 symptoms. Anyone who has had close contact with a person who has COVID-19 should also stay home and monitor their health. Invited guests who live with those at higher risk should also consider the potential risk to their loved ones.
Consider keeping a list of guests who attended for potential future contact tracing needs.
Encourage social distancing

Host your gathering outdoors, when possible. If this is not feasible, make sure the room or space is well-ventilated (for example, open a window).
Arrange tables and chairs to allow for social distancing. People from the same household can be in groups together and don’t need to be 6 feet apart – just 6 feet away from other families.
If planning activities for adults and/or kids, consider those where social distancing can be maintained, like sidewalk chalk art or frisbee.
When guests arrive, minimize gestures that promote close contact. For example, don’t shake hands, do elbow bumps, or give hugs. Instead wave and verbally greet them.
Wear masks

Wear masks when less than 6 feet apart from people or indoors.
Consider providing masks for guests or asking them to bring their own.
Clean hands often

Consider providing hand sanitizer in addition to clearly marked hand washing areas.
Wash your hands for at least 20 seconds when entering and exiting social gatherings. If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
Make sure there is adequate soap or hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol available in the restrooms and encourage guests not to form a line at the door. Consider also providing cleaning supplies that allow guests to wipe down surfaces before they leave.
Remind guests to wash their hands before serving or eating food.
Use single-use hand towels or paper towels for drying hands so guests do not share a towel.
Limit the number of people handling or serving food

Encourage guests to bring their own food and drinks.
Limit people going in and out of the areas where food is being prepared or handled, such as in the kitchen or around the grill, if possible.
If serving any food, consider identifying one person to serve all food so that multiple people are not handling the serving utensils.
Use single-use options or identify one person to serve sharable items, like salad dressings, food containers, and condiments, so that multiple people are not handling the items.
Limit contact with commonly touched surfaces or shared items

Use touchless garbage cans or pails.
Use gloves when removing garbage bags or handling and disposing of trash. Wash hands after removing gloves.
Clean and disinfect commonly touched surfaces and any shared items between use when feasible.
If you choose to use any shared items that are reusable (e.g., seating covers, tablecloths, linen napkins), wash, clean, and sanitize them after the event. 

Attending an event or gathering

Prepare before you go:

Stay home if you have been diagnosed with COVID-19 (symptoms of COVID-19) , if you are waiting for COVID-19 test results, or may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19.
Check with the organizer or event venue for updated information about any COVID-19 safety guidelines and if they have steps in place to prevent the spread of the virus.
Prioritize attending outdoor activities over indoor activities and stay within your local area as much as possible.
Bring supplies to help you and others stay healthy—for example, masks (bring extra), hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, and drinking water.
Use social distancing and limit physical contact

Maintain a distance of at least 6 feet or more from people who don’t live in your household. Be particularly mindful in areas where it may harder to keep this distance, such as check-in areas, parking lots, and routes of entry and exit.
Select seating or determine where to stand based on the ability to keep 6 feet of space from people who don’t live in your household, including if you will be eating or drinking.
Arrive to the event early or at off-peak times to avoid crowding and congested areas.
Avoid using restroom facilities or concession areas at high traffic times, such as intermission, half-time, or immediately at the end of the event.
Wear masks

Wear a mask when interacting with other people to minimize the risk of transmitting the virus.
Wearing masks is most important when social distancing is difficult.
Masks are strongly encouraged in settings where individuals might raise their voices, such as shouting, chanting, or singing.
Limit contact with commonly touched surfaces or shared items

Use touchless garbage cans or pails and cashless payment options when possible. Otherwise, exchange cash or card by placing payment in a receipt tray, if available, or on the counter.
Avoid any self-serve food or drink options, such as buffets, salad bars, and condiment or drink stations. Use grab-and-go meal options, if available.
Use disposable food service items including utensils and dishes, if available.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer immediately before eating food or after touching any common surfaces like hand railings, payment kiosks, door handles, and toilets. 

Using Gyms, Fitness Centers, or Studios

Updated 12/31/2020

Exercising and physical activity are important for physical and mental health and should be continued for healthy living, especially during the coronavirus crisis. However, it is necessary to take precautions to reduce exposure to and transmission of COVID-19. The main way by which people are infected with COVID-19 is through exposure to respiratory droplets carrying infectious virus. COVID-19 has been shown to spread at gyms, fitness classes, and studios.

Considerations for gyms, fitness centers, and studios

There are multiple factors that increase the risk of COVID-19 spread in gyms, fitness centers, and studios (dance, karate, spin, etc.). There are ways to reduce this risk:

Proximity: maintain at least 6 feet of separation (about 2 arm lengths) and avoid close contact with other people.
Mask use: select a facility that has requires all staff and attendees to wear a mask that covers their mouth and nose at all times.
Exertion level: limit high-intensity activities to the outdoors.
Ventilation: look for gyms, fitness centers, or studios that have high ceilings and use ventilation practices such as opening doors and windows and use portable air cleaners that have HEPA filters.
Frequently touched surfaces: wipe down frequently touched surfaces, such as machines and equipment, with disinfecting wipes before and after use.
Clean hands: wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before and after using machines.
Number of people: go during off-peak times to avoid crowding.
Duration: if choosing to stay indoors, keep your workouts as brief as possible to avoid prolonged exposure.
Do not visit a gym, fitness center, or studio if:

The facility does not have any mitigation measures in place, such as requirements for masks and physical distancing.
You have tested positive for COVID-19.
You are showing any symptoms of COVID-19.
Any of the people in your household or close contacts have tested positive for COVID-19 or are showing symptoms of COVID-19.
You have been recently tested for COVID-19 and are waiting on test results.
Prepare before you go

Use options for online reservations and check-in systems when available.
Go to the gym, fitness center, or studio during low-usage times.
Be aware of any extra prevention practices being implemented by the facility, such as new plexiglass barriers, mask policies, and closing of shared locker room space.
Be prepared to not use the locker room in order to reduce the risk of being in close proximity to others in a small space. Arrive in work-out clothes and shower at home to avoid using shared locker room and bathrooms.
Limit activity indoors, especially group activities

Use facilities with outdoor space or options for virtual classes and training sessions as much as possible.
Limit attendance at high intensity activities such as indoor group training sessions. If you do attend such a session, maintain as much distance as possible– at least 6 feet –between yourself and other individuals, and be sure to wear a mask covering your mouth and nose. If this is not possible, consider an outdoor training session instead.
If you need to be indoors, open windows to increase airflow throughout the space.
Choose low-intensity activities over high-intensity activities when indoors

Limit high-intensity activity when indoors, such as vigorous dancing, pick-up basketball, running, racquetball/squash, and spinning.
Lower-intensity activities, such as yoga or walking, are safer indoor options. However, make sure to use physical distancing, limit physical contact, take extra precautions with shared equipment, and wear a mask.
Use physical distancing and limit physical contact

Maintain at least 6 feet of separation as much as possible in areas that may lead to close contact (within 6 feet) among other people, such as weight rooms, group studios, pools and saunas, courts and fields, walking/running tracks, locker rooms, check-in areas, parking lots, and routes of entry and exit.
Increase distance for high-intensity activities.
Don’t shake hands, give high-fives, do elbow bumps, or touch others because close contact increases the risk of acquiring COVID-19.
Take extra precautions with shared equipment

Ensure equipment is clean and disinfected. Wipe down machines and equipment with disinfecting wipes and use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol before using machines.
Do not share items that cannot be cleaned, sanitized, or disinfected between use, such as resistance bands and weightlifting belts.
Wash your hands with soap and water or use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol before and after using shared equipment.
Wear a mask

Cover your mouth and nose with a mask when interacting with other people to minimize the risk of transmitting the virus.
Wearing both a mask and physical distancing is important. Do any vigorous-intensity exercise outside when possible, stay at least 6 feet away from other participants, trainers, and clients, and wear a mask. If the intensity of the exercise makes it difficult to wear a mask, it is especially important to do that activities outdoors away from others.
Wash your hands before adjusting your mask—review information about proper use, removal, and washing of masks.
For healthy people, wearing masks during exercise has not been shown to be harmful. However, individuals affected by lung disease, such as asthma or COPD, or heart disease, should be evaluated by a healthcare provider before attempting exercise with any mask.
Remove your mask if it gets moist from sweat and replace it with a clean mask while exercising. Have more than one mask on hand so that you can easily replace a moist mask with a dry one.

Going to a nail salon
Prepare for your appointment

Book services in advance to remove the need for waiting in a lobby with other people. If you must wait, maintain social distance.
Before you go, call and ask if all staff are wearing masks at work and if there are physical barriers to minimize risk of transmission (e.g., plexiglass barriers).
If offered by the salon, wait in your car or outside until you can be contacted by mobile phone when it is your turn to be seen for an appointment.

Wear a mask

Wear a mask at all times when inside the salon.
Wash hands often and limit contact with common surfaces or items

Wash your hands or use hand sanitizer immediately before receiving your service and after touching any common surfaces like curing lamps, countertops, doorknobs, toilets, tables, light switches, phones, faucets, sinks, and keyboards.
Use cashless payment options when possible. If not available, ensure that cash and cards are handled with care by employees either by changing gloves between each transaction or with use of hand sanitizer between clients.
Look for no-touch waste baskets at the cash registers and in the restrooms.

Visiting a library
Use curbside pickup or choose digital materials

Use online reservation and advance-order checkout systems, if possible.
Choose digital over print materials, if possible.
Request a curbside pick-up if available and use masks during pick-up exchanges.
Clean hands when handling shared items or electronics

Wash your hands before and after exchanges.
Clean and disinfect electronics (laptops) and library materials in plastic containers (CDs, audio books) during returns and/or exchanges.
If allowed and available inside the library, use computer stations one person at a time. Ensure they are cleaned before use and use a disinfectant wipe on the mouse and keyboard.

Traveling overnight
Check the hotel’s COVID-19 prevention practices before you go

Use options for online reservation and check-in, mobile room key, and contactless payment.
Before you go, call and ask if all staff are wearing masks at work.
Look for any extra prevention practices being implemented by the hotel, such as plexiglass barriers at check-in counters, and physical distancing signs in the lobby.
Ask if the hotel has updated policies about cleaning and disinfecting or removing frequently touched surfaces and items (such as pens, room keys, tables, phones, doorknobs, light switches, elevator buttons, water fountains, ATMs/card payment stations, business center computers and printers, ice/vending machines, and remote controls).


Wear masks and limit close contact with others

Wear a mask in the lobby or other common areas.
Minimize use of areas that may lead to close contact (within 6 feet) with other people as much as possible, like break rooms, outside patios, inside lounging areas, dining areas/kitchens, game rooms, pools, hot tubs, saunas, spas, salons, and fitness centers.
Consider taking the stairs. Otherwise wait to use the elevator until you can either ride alone or only with people from your household.
Choose contactless options, when possible

Request contactless delivery for any room service order.
If you are considering cleaning your travel lodgings, see CDC’s guidance on how to clean and disinfect.
Protect yourself and others when you travel away your community

***Tips for Voters to Reduce Spread of COVID-19
There are steps you can take to help you vote and minimize your risk during the COVID-19 pandemic. The more prepared you are, the less time you may have to spend at the voting site.

When voting, you can protect yourself and others if you:

avoid close contact: try to stay at least 6 feet apart of other people, especially those not wearing a mask
wear a mask around others
take care when touching surfaces and wash your hands often or, if not possible, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol

6 Steps – Before you vote

heck that you are registered

This may increase your available voting options, and can also help you spend less time at your voting place
lite icon
Check how you can votee

Some states offer early voting and, because of the COVID-19 pandemic, some have expanded this option
Consider early voting, if available, in case you are unable to vote on election day
States must offer accessible options for people with disabilities, but options may vary by state, so check ahead of time what your state’s option may be
If you live in a long-term care facility or similar place, you may be able to have supervised absentee voting
lite icon
Check when and where you can votee

Your place to vote may have changed from previous elections because of COVID-19
If you are at higher risk for getting very sick from COVID-19, plan to vote when it is not so busy, like mid-morning
Check ahead for places or times you can vote
Check ahead with your place to vote for options for people with disabilities
lite icon
Plan how you can get to your place to vote in the safest way possible

Try to avoid crowded ride sharing services, buses, or trains
Protect Yourself When Using Transportation
Some public and private transport services offer free or cheaper rides for voting
Older people or people with disabilities may be able to get help with getting to their voting place
Check if in your area private carpool companies, volunteer organizations or your city public transportation offer these services
If you drive and if you are able to check the voter line, join when the line is shorter
lite icon
Plan for someone to take care of your loved ones

Taking children with you to vote can increase their risk of getting COVID-19
If you are the main caregiver at home, ask someone to watch your loved ones
Ask this person to wear a mask if they don’t live with you
lite icon
Be prepared so you can limit the time you are in your voting place

This will help reduce risk for COVID-19 by avoiding delays when you vote
If you can, fill in any registration forms before going to vote
The more prepared you are, the less time you may have to spend at the voting site
Check to see if your state has sample ballots
To speed up voting, you can make a list or fill in a sample ballot to take with you

6 Steps – The day you vote
The more prepared you are, the more you reduce your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19.

lite icon
Voters have the right to vote, regardless of whether they are sick or in quarantine.

Voters who are sick or in quarantine should take steps to protect poll workers and other voters. This includes wearing a mask, staying at least 6 feet away from others, and washing your hands or using hand sanitizer before and after voting. You should also let poll workers know that you are sick or in quarantine when you arrive at the polling location. Check with local authorities for any additional guidance.

lite icon
Bring your own supplies

Use this checklist to remember things to bring with you when you go to vote:
Necessary documentation such as your identification (check with your voting site)
A mask
An extra mask
Tissues
Hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol
Water
Black ink pen
Bring prepared items with you (e.g., registration forms, sample ballots)
lite icon
Wear a mask

You should wear a mask consistently and correctly in public and around people who don’t live with you.

If you must take your mask off, use hand sanitizer before and after
Have an extra mask in case yours gets wet or dirty
A few people might not be able to wear a mask because of a disability or condition.

lite icon
Protect yourself when using transport

Open windows if you can
Wear a mask
Avoid touching things if you can and use hand sanitizer if you do
Stay 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) apart from others if you can
lite icon
Clean your hands often

Wash your hands or use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before entering and after leaving your place of voting
Use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before and after touching items that many others may have touched, such as door handles
Do not wipe down voting equipment unless you are told to do so
lite icon
Keep your distance from others

Stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other people as much as you can
Stay apart even if you are wearing masks

***Holiday Tips
Holiday Travel
Travel may increase your chance of spreading and getting COVID-19. CDC continues to recommend postponing travel and staying home, as this is the best way to protect yourself and others this year.

If you are considering traveling for a holiday, visit CDC’s Travel page to help you decide what is best for you and your family.

Everyone Can Make Holiday Celebrations Safer
Wear a mask
Wear a mask with two or more layers to stop the spread of COVID-19 to protect others and yourself.
Wear your mask over your nose and mouth, secure it under your chin, and make sure it fits snugly against the sides of your face.
Wear a mask indoors and outdoors.
In cold weather, wear your mask under your scarf, ski mask, or balaclava.
Keep a spare mask in case your mask becomes wet from moisture in your breath or from snow or rain.

Stay at least 6 feet away from others who do not live with you
Indoors or outdoors, you are more likely to get or spread COVID-19 when you are in close contact with others for a total of 15 minutes or more over a 24-hour period.
Remember that people without symptoms or with a recent negative test result can still spread COVID-19 to others.

Avoid crowded, poorly ventilated indoor spaces
As much as possible, avoid crowds and indoors spaces that do not offer fresh air from the outdoors. If indoors, bring in fresh air by opening windows and doors, if possible.

Wash your hands
Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after you have been in a public place, after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing and before eating.
Make sure to dry your hands completely using a clean towel or by air drying.
If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid touching your mask, eyes, nose, and mouth.

Get Your Flu and COVID-19 Shots
Get your flu and COVID-19 shots as soon as possible.
Do not get the shots at the same time. Get them at least 14 days apart.
The flu shot can help protect you and your family, friends, and community from getting and spreading flu.
By getting a flu shot, you can also help lower hospital visits and serious health problems from flu.

Safer Celebrations
Celebrating virtually or with the people you live with is the safest choice this winter. If you do gather with people who don’t live with you, gatherings and activities held outdoors are safer than indoor gatherings.

In addition to following the steps that everyone can take to make the holidays safer, take these additional steps if attending a gathering to make your celebration safer:

Have conversations ahead of time to understand expectations for celebrating together.
Bring your own food, drinks, plates, cups, and utensils.
Wear a mask indoors and outdoors.
Avoid shouting or singing.

If Hosting
If you are sick or have been near someone who thinks they may have or have been exposed to COVID-19, cancel the gathering.
Provide single-use options, like salad dressing and condiment packets, and disposable items like plates and utensils.
Limit the number of guests.
Have extra unused masks available for your guests and encourage everyone to wear them inside and outside.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces and items between use.
If celebrating indoors, bring in fresh air by opening windows and doors, if possible. You can use a window fan in one of the open windows to blow air out of the window. This will pull fresh air in through the other open windows.
Have a separate space for guests to wash their hands or provide hand sanitizer.

Other Holiday Activities
Host a virtual gathering with friends and family.
Drive or walk around your community to wave to neighbors from a safe distance.
Take a food or gift to family, friends, and neighbors in a way that does not involve contact with others, such as leaving them at the door.
Throw a virtual dance party and collaborate with friends and family on a playlist. Celebrate outside with neighbors and friends.
Volunteer to help others in need.
Attend a virtual religious ceremony or celebration.

***Holidays and Stress
Take Care of Yourself

Being away from family and friends during the holidays can be hard.
When you talk with your friends and family about plans, it’s okay if you decide to stay home and remain apart from others.

Do What’s Best for Your Household

Doing what’s best for you includes eating healthy foods and getting enough sleep.
Take care of your body and stay active to lessen fatigue, anxiety, and sadness.

Spend Time with Those in Your Household

Hard choices to be apart this year may mean that you can spend many more years with your loved ones.
Do what is best for your health and the health of your loved ones. This year spend time with those in your own household.

***Doctor Visits and Getting Medicines

Talk to your doctor online, by phone, or e-mail
Use telemedicine, if available, or communicate with your doctor or nurse by phone or e-mail.
Talk to your doctor about rescheduling procedures that are not urgently needed.

If you must visit in-person, protect yourself and others

If you think you have COVID-19, notify the doctor or healthcare provider before your visit and follow their instructions.
Cover your mouth and nose with a mask when you have to go out in public.
Do not touch your eyes, nose, or mouth.
Stay at least 6 feet away from others while inside and in lines.
When paying, use touchless payment methods if possible. If you cannot use touchless payment, sanitize your hands after paying with card, cash, or check. Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds when you get home.

Limit in-person visits to the pharmacy
Plan to order and pick up all your prescriptions at the same time.
If possible, call prescription orders in ahead of time. Use drive-thru windows, curbside services (wait in your car until the prescription is ready), mail-order, or other delivery services. Do the same for pet medicine.
Check with your doctor and pharmacist to see if you can get a larger supply of your medicines so you do not have to visit the pharmacy as often.

If you need family planning services
Continue to seek care from your regular health care provider, or
Find a family planning provider using the Office of Population Affairs’ Find a Family Planning Clinic Tool .
Health care providers may be providing services in person, by telephone, or by video. Contact your health care provider any time you have questions or concerns about your contraceptive method or family planning services.

***Visiting Beaches and Pools

What you need to know
Stay home if you are sick.
Stay at least 6 feet away, both in and out of the water, from people you don’t live with.
Wear a mask when you are not in the water.
Wash your hands often and don’t share items with people you don’t live with.

The places we visit to swim, play, and relax in water include beaches — swim areas in oceans, lakes, and other natural bodies of water — and pools, water playgrounds, and hot tubs. There is no evidence that SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people through water in these places.

The virus is thought to spread mostly person-to-person, by respiratory droplets released when an infected person coughs, sneezes, or talks. These droplets can land in the mouths or noses of people who are nearby or possibly be inhaled into the lungs. The virus might also spread to hands from a contaminated surface and then to the nose, mouth, or possibly eyes. Infected people can spread the virus whether or not they have symptoms.

Fortunately, there are several actions you can take to reduce your risk of getting or spreading the virus when you go to public swim areas, such as beaches, pools, water playgrounds, and hot tubs.

Before you go
Continue to take these steps to reduce your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19:

Correctly and consistently wear a mask that completely covers your nose and mouth
Stay at least 6 feet away from others who do not live with you
Avoid crowds
Avoid poorly ventilated indoor spaces
Stay home when you are sick
Wash your hands frequently with soap and water for at least 20 seconds (or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol)
Get vaccinated when the vaccine is available to you
Get tested if you have signs or symptoms of COVID-19, or if you think you may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19
Even if you and others (including children) do not feel sick and do not have any symptoms, you can still spread COVID-19 to family, friends, and community.

Do NOT be around others if you have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, if you are sick, or if you have tested positive for COVID-19.

Stay home if you have symptoms of COVID-19, have been diagnosed with COVID-19, are waiting for COVID-19 test results, or were recently exposed to someone with COVID-19.
Check to see if the public swim area, pool, water playground, or hot tub has steps in place to prevent the spread of the virus.
Bring supplies that help you and others stay healthy—for example, a mask (or two, for each person, in case one gets wet), hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, disinfectant wipes, tissues, and paper towels.
Use social distancing in and out of the water
Whether you’re in or out of the water, stay at least 6 feet away from people you don’t live with.
Avoid crowded swim areas, beaches, pools, water playgrounds, and hot tubs where you cannot stay 6 feet away from others.

Wear a mask
Wear masks when you are not in the water.
Do not place a mask on children younger than 2 years of age or on anyone who has trouble breathing or is unconscious, incapacitated, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without help.
Masks are especially important when physical distancing is hard.

Wash hands often and avoid sharing items
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially before eating or drinking and when you arrive and leave the swim area. If soap and water are not available, use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol and rub until your hands are dry.
Hand sanitizers are not as effective when hands are visibly dirty or greasy, so wipe sand or dirt off before applying it.
Avoid sharing items, such as food, equipment, toys, and supplies, with people who don’t live with you.
If you are not wearing your mask, make sure to cover coughs and sneezes with a tissue or inside of your elbow, throw the tissue in the trash, and wash your hands immediately, or if soap and water are not available, use hand sanitizer.
Check out more information on how to protect yourself and others. Know the symptoms of COVID-19, and contact your health care provider if you develop symptoms.

Swimming does carry some health and safety risks. Visit CDC’s Healthy Swimming website for information to help you prevent illness and drowning, so you can safely enjoy the fun and health benefits of swimming.

***Visiting Parks and Recreational Facilities
What you need to know
Visit parks and recreation areas that are close to your home.
Don’t visit crowded parks or campgrounds.
Carefully consider use of playgrounds, and help children follow guidelines.
Stay at least 6 feet away from people you don’t live with.
Wear a mask.
Wash your hands often and don’t share items with people you don’t live with.

Staying physically active is one of the best ways to keep your mind and body healthy. In many areas, people can visit parks, trails, and open spaces as a way to relieve stress, get some fresh air, and stay active. While these facilities and areas can offer health benefits, it is important that you follow the steps below to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

When visiting parks, beaches, or recreational facilities open for public use, try to protect against exposure to SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, by practicing social distancing and everyday steps such as washing hands often and covering coughs and sneezes.

At all parks and recreation areas
Follow these actions when visiting a park, beach, or recreational facility:

Visit parks that are close to your home

Traveling long distances to visit a park may contribute to the spread of COVID-19, as:

Travel may require you to stop along the way or be in close contact with others with whom you may not otherwise have contact.
Travel may also expose you to surfaces contaminated with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.
Check with the park or recreation area in advance to prepare safely

National, State, or local parks: the federal or State and local authorities will decide whether parks and other recreational facilities will open. Check with the park in advance to be sure you know which areas or services are open, such as visitors’ centers, bathroom facilities, and concessions, and bring what you need with you, such as hand sanitizer or other supplies to maintain proper hygiene.
Beaches or other swimming areas: State and local authorities will decide whether swim areas at oceans, lakes, and other natural bodies of water will be open. Please check with individual beaches for specific details, including whether the water is open for swimming.

Use social distancing and avoid crowded parks 

Stay at least 6 feet from people you don’t live with (“social distancing”) at all times. This might make some open areas, trails, and paths better to use than others. Do not go into a crowded area.
Avoid gathering with people you don’t live with.
Avoid crowded parks. Do not visit parks where you cannot stay at least 6 feet away from people you don’t live with.

Wear a mask

Wear a mask as feasible. Masks are most essential in times when social distancing is difficult, including when hiking on trails that may be popular or crowded.
Masks should not be placed on:
Children under age 2
Anyone who has trouble breathing
Anyone who is unconscious, can’t move, or is otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance
Masks should not be worn when engaging in activities where the mask might become wet, like when swimming.
Clean hands often

Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially after going to the bathroom, before eating, and after blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing.
Adults and older children who can safely use hand sanitizer: Use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol and rub hands together until dry, if soap and water are not readily available.
Stay home if you are sick

Do not visit parks if you are sick with, tested positive for COVID-19, or were recently (within 14 days) exposed to COVID-19.

If you are sick with or tested positive for COVID-19, were recently exposed (within 14 days) to someone with COVID-19, or just don’t feel well, do not visit public areas including parks or recreational facilities.
Follow recommended steps to take if you are sick.

At playgrounds
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following….

Carefully consider use of playgrounds, and help children follow guidelines.

In communities where there is ongoing spread of COVID-19, playgrounds can be hard to keep safe because:

They are often crowded and could make social distancing difficult;
It can be difficult to keep surfaces clean and disinfected;
SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread when young children touch contaminated objects, and then touch their eyes, nose, or mouth.
If you choose to visit a playground:

Maintain a distance of at least 6 feet away from people you don’t live with.
Wash hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
Adults and older children who can safely use hand sanitizer: Use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol and rub hands together until dry, if soap and water are not readily available.

When camping
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following….

Camp and hike with people in your household. Keep at least 6 feet away from others at the campsite, on trails, and in other areas of the park. If you choose to camp or hike with people outside your household, consider the following:
Camp in separate tents spaced out by at least 6 feet and avoid sharing camping supplies (including food and drinks).
There is no evidence that food or food packaging play a significant role in spreading the virus, but avoid sharing items such as serving utensils, multi-serving beverage containers, and condiment bottles with people outside your household.
Pack hand soap, hand sanitizer (containing at least 60% alcohol) and supplies to clean and disinfect commonly-touched surfaces. Restroom facilities without running water, such as portable toilets and vault toilets, may not be stocked with hand hygiene products.
Continue good hand hygiene practices after touching surfaces such as doors and handles, including those within bathroom and showers rooms, as well as water fountains or spigots, laundry facilities, ice machines, trash and recycling cans and bins, payment stations, vending machines, and other camping amenities. Here is more information on ways to protect yourself and others.

Water-related activities
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following….

There is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, or water playgrounds. Additionally, proper operation of these aquatic venues and disinfection of the water (with chlorine or bromine) should inactivate SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19.

Playing sports
Follow the general principles listed above, plus the following….

The more people a participant interacts with, the closer the physical interaction, the more sharing of equipment there is by multiple players, and the longer the interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread.

Therefore, risk of COVID-19 spread can be different, depending on the type of activity.

***Playing Sports
What you need to know

Stay home if you have tested positive for COVID-19 or are waiting on test results, are showing COVID-19 symptoms, or have had a close contact  with a person who has tested positive for or who has symptoms of COVID-19.
Bring your own equipment, like gloves, head gear, helmets, water bottles, and bats, if possible, to limit shared equipment.
Stay at least 6 feet (about 2 arm lengths) from other players when possible.
Wear a mask that covers your nose and mouth to help protect yourself and others.
Clean or sanitize your hands before and after practices, games, and sharing equipment.
Tell a coach or staff member if you don’t feel well.

This information is for youth and adult athletes considering participating in a sports league or team.

This information is not designed to provide guidance to adult sports leagues or organizations who plan or manage competition.  CDC does not currently have guidance for adult sports leagues, however organizations and administrators can reference the Considerations for Youth Sports  to find strategies for reducing exposure risks during sports competition.

Make a game plan to reduce risk
There is an increased risk of COVID-19 spread while playing team sports. There are ways to reduce this risk:

Setting: choose outdoor settings as much as possible, particularly for high intensity activities.
Proximity: maintain at least 6 feet of separation (about 2 arm lengths) and avoid close contact with other people.
Field of play: try to choose a larger playing area so that you can spread out from each other.
Mask use: wear a mask that covers your mouth and nose at all times.
Exertion level: limit high-intensity activities to the outdoors.
Travel: limit travel required outside of the local community.
Ventilation: look for facilities that have high ceilings and use ventilation practices such as opening doors and windows and use portable air cleaners that have HEPA filters.
Frequently touched surfaces and shared equipment or gear: wipe off frequently touched surfaces, equipment, or gear with disinfecting wipes before and after use.
Clean hands: wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before and after using machines.
Number of people: limit how many individuals you interact with.
Duration: if choosing to stay indoors, keep your activities as brief as possible to avoid prolonged exposure.

Prepare before you participate in sports

Bring extra masks and hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Prioritize participating in outdoor activities over indoor activities and stay within your local area as much as possible.
If using an indoor facility, allow previous groups to leave the facility before entering with your team. If possible, allow time for cleaning and/or disinfecting.
Check the league’s COVID-19 prevention practices before you go to make sure they have steps in place to prevent the spread of the virus.
If you are at an increased risk for severe illness or have existing health conditions, take extra precautions and preventive actions during the activity or choose individual or at-home activities.

Take steps to protect yourself and others

Know your teammates

What your teammates do off the field is as important as what they do on the field. If they are attending gatherings without masks or physical distancing, going to bars or restaurants, etc., that puts the whole team at risk.
 Advice for parents

Help your athlete follow mitigation measures off the field. What one athlete does at home or off the field can impact the entire team.
Talk to your child’s coach and let them know you support all measures to slow the spread of COVID-19. These can include practicing outside instead of inside, limiting attendance at practices and games, and requiring masks of athletes, coaches, and visitors.
Stay home if sick

If you have symptoms of COVID-19, have been diagnosed with COVID-19, are waiting for COVID-19 test results, or may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, you should stay home and not participate in any sports.
Have smaller team sizes

Sports with a large number of players on a team may increase the likelihood of spread compared to sports with fewer team members.
Limit your team to a core group of participants, by restricting non-team players from joining when your team is short players and not adding new members during the season.
Maintain careful rosters of which players, family members, coaches, and ancillary staff attend each practice and game, and have current contact information for everyone. If a COVID-19 exposure occurs, timely notifications are critical, and this information will help contact tracing activities occur more smoothly.

Reduce physical closeness between players, volunteers, and spectators when possible

Maintain at least 6 feet between yourself and your teammates, other competitors, and officials while actively participating in the sport.
Focus on building individual skills, like batting, dribbling, kicking, and strength training.
Avoid high fives, handshakes, fist bumps or hugs.
Keep space between players in the practice areas, including on the sideline, dugout, and bench.
Wait in car or away from the playing area until just before the warm-up period or the beginning of the game.
Avoid congregating in the parking lot or near the field before or after games.
If it is not possible to avoid congregating, practice physical distancing by ensuring there is at least 6 feet between participants.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth to reduce risk of virus transmission.
Limit nonessential visitors, spectators, and volunteers. Ensure they wear masks and maintain physical distancing.

Wear a mask
Wear a mask if feasible, especially when it is difficult to stay less than 6 feet apart from other people and especially indoors, for example in close contact sports such as basketball.
Lower-intensity sports: Emphasize wearing masks, limiting physical contact, taking extra precautions with shared equipment, and practicing physical distancing for lower intensity sports.
Higher-intensity sports: Limit high-intensity sports when indoors. People who are engaged in high-intensity activities, like running, may not be able to wear a mask if it causes difficulty breathing.
Increase distance for high-intensity activities.
If unable to wear a mask, consider conducting the activity in a location with greater ventilation and air exchange (for instance, outdoors versus indoors) and where it is possible to maintain physical distance from others.
If your mask gets wet, be sure to change it as it may be more difficult to breathe through.
CDC does NOT recommend the use of face shields or goggles as a substitute for masks, however they may be used as eye protection in addition to the use of a mask.

Minimize sharing of equipment or gear. Don’t share food or drinks.
Encourage players to bring their own equipment if possible, like gloves, balls, and helmets.
Bring your own water to minimize use and touching of drinking fountains. Consider labeling your water battle with your name.
Clean and disinfect shared items between use.
Don’t share towels, clothing, or any items used to wipe your face or hands.
Avoid sharing food, drink containers (e.g., coolers), and utensils.

Cover your coughs and sneezes. Don’t spit.

Cover your cough or sneeze with a tissue. Used tissues should be thrown away and hands washed immediately with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Wash hands

Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with 60% alcohol.
Before and after you play.
Before adjusting your mask—review information about proper use, removal, and washing of masks.
Limit travel outside of your area

Consider competing against teams in your local area (neighborhood, town, or community).
Advice for coaches

Send a welcome email or call parents (for youth players) and/or players.
Inform them about actions that the sports program will take to protect players.
Remind them to stay home if they are sick, have symptoms of COVID-19, have tested positive for COVID-19 or are waiting for test results, or if they have been around someone who is sick or who has symptoms of COVID-19.
Be a role model. Wear a mask that fits snugly against the sides of your face and covers your mouth and nose and encourage family members, fans, officials, and sports staff to wear one during practices and games.
Provide hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol to players before and after practice/game.
Educate players about covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue. Discourage spitting.
Remind players about physical distancing and identify markers (such as signage or tape on floor) that indicate a distance of at least 6 feet.
At practice, focus on building players’ individual skills and cardiovascular conditioning, so they can limit close contact with one another.
Check with your sports administrator to make sure they are following cleaning and disinfection recommendations.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces on field, court, or play surface (such as drinking fountains) at least daily and shared equipment (for example, mats) between use.
Checklist for coaches

Send a welcome email or call parents (for youth players) and/or players. Inform them about actions that the sports program will take to protect players. Remind them to stay home if sick or if they have been around someone who is sick.
Be a role model. Wear a mask and encourage family members, fans, officials, and sports staff to wear one during practices and games.
Provide hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol to players before and after practice/game and encourage them to wash their hands with soap and water.
Educate players about covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or their elbow. Discourage spitting.
Remind players about social distancing and identify markers (such as signage or tape on floor).
Encourage your players to focus on building their individual skills and cardiovascular conditioning, so they can limit close contact with other players.
Check with your sports administrator to make sure they are following cleaning and disinfection recommendations.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces on field, court, or play surface (such as drinking fountains) at least daily or between use.
Clean and disinfect shared equipment.

***Attending Sporting Events

As some communities in the United States re-start sporting events, CDC offers the following considerations for ways in which people who go to a sporting event can slow the spread of COVID-19. These considerations are meant to supplement – not replace – any state, tribal, local, or territorial health and safety laws, rules, and regulations with which the public must comply.

Spectators at sporting events should consider the number of COVID-19 cases both where they live and where the sporting event is taking place before deciding to attend. The higher the transmission of COVID-19 in the community, the higher the risk of transmission of COVID-19 at sporting events.

CDC has not recommended a specific limit on the number of people that are safe to attend a sporting event. People who plan to go to a sporting event should contact the sporting program to find out whether seating arrangements and event logistics allow people to stay at least 6 feet apart and the maximum number of attendees the program will allow.

In general, the number that can attend should allow groups from different households to remain at least 6 feet apart from each other. Rather than focusing on an ideal number, emphasis should be placed on the ability to reduce and limit contact between people. If the safety measures implemented by the sports program do not allow people to remain at least 6 feet apart, people attending sporting events should consider alternate ways of participating in the sporting event. Before attending a sporting event, people who plan on going should learn more about risks involved when deciding to go out.

Guiding principles
Continue to take these steps to reduce your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19:

Correctly and consistently wear a mask that completely covers your nose and mouth
Stay at least 6 feet away from others who do not live with you
Avoid crowds
Avoid poorly ventilated indoor spaces
Stay home when you are sick
Wash your hands frequently with soap and water for at least 20 seconds (or use hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol)
Get vaccinated when the vaccine is available to you
Get tested if you have signs or symptoms of COVID-19, or if you think you may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19
Even if you and others (including children) do not feel sick and do not have any symptoms, you can still spread COVID-19 to family, friends, and community.

Do NOT be around others if you have been exposed to someone with COVID-19, if you are sick, or if you have tested positive for COVID-19.

People who attend a sporting event can take action to help lower the risk of COVID-19 exposure and reduce the spread while attending sporting events.

The more people someone interacts with, the closer, the longer, and the more frequent the interaction, and the more contact with frequently touched surfaces, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread. Indoor events pose a greater risk than outdoor events.

The greater the number of sporting events someone attends, the greater the risk of COVID-19 spread. The risk of COVID-19 can be different, depending on the type of sporting event someone attends or the way they participate in the sporting event, as well as the number of COVID-19 cases both where they live and where the sporting event is taking place. The risk of COVID-19 increases for spectators in sporting event settings as follows:

Lowest risk
Watching the sporting event on television or online in your home with members of your household
More risk
Tailgating or attending a sporting event in your local community when

The event, including tailgating, is held outdoors
All attendees wear masks
Attendees are discouraged from yelling, chanting, or singing
All attendees stay at least six feet away from people they do not live with
Attendees at a community sporting event are from the local area and limited to family and friends of athletes
Attendees do not share food or drinks or personal items (e.g., noisemakers) with people they don’t live with
The sports program has several mitigation strategies (e.g., blocked off seats or rows, visual cues such as floor markings for social distancing, cleaning and disinfection) and messaging in place to prevent or reduce the spread of COVID-19
Even more risk
Tailgating or attending a sporting event in a nearby community when

The event is held in an open, well-ventilated indoor space
Most attendees wear masks
Attendees yell, chant, and sing while wearing masks
Most attendees stay at least six feet way from people they do not live with
Attendees are from the local community
Attendees limit their sharing of food and personal items (e.g., noisemakers) with others
The sports program has a couple of mitigation strategies and messaging in place to prevent or reduce the spread of COVID-19
Highest risk
Traveling to a different geographic area to attend a sporting event or tailgate when

The event is held in a confined, poorly ventilated indoor space
Attendees do not wear masks
Attendees yell, chant, and sing without masks
Attendees do not stay at least six feet away from people they do not live with
Attendees travel from outside the area to attend the event
Attendees freely share their food and personal items (e.g., noisemakers) with people they don’t live with
The sports program has no modifications or messaging in place to prevent or reduce the spread of COVID-19

Before the sports event
Stay home if you have COVID-19, if you have symptoms of COVID-19, if you are waiting for COVID-19 test results, or may have been exposed to someone with COVID-19.
Check with the event organizer or venue for updated information about any COVID-19 mitigation strategies and if they have steps in place to prevent the spread of the virus.
Prioritize attending outdoor activities over indoor activities and stay within your local area as much as possible.
Bring supplies to help you and others stay healthy—for example, masks (bring extra), hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol, snacks, and drinking water.
If you are at an increased risk for severe illness, have an existing medical condition, or need to take extra precautions, consider ways to be a spectator and supporter of sports teams that do not require attendance at a large in-person gathering.
If you live with or regularly interact with someone who is at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19 , consider not attending sporting events where social distancing cannot be maintained and where masks are not worn.
Take extra precaution if attending a large sporting event in a rural area, as public health and healthcare infrastructure may be limited if an outbreak does occur.
Wear masks and take other steps to protect yourself when using public transportation to travel to and from sporting events.
At the sports event
Wear masks

Wear a mask when interacting with other people to minimize the risk of transmitting the virus.
Wearing masks is most important when social distancing is difficult (e.g., when moving within a crowd or audience).
Wear a mask at both indoor and outdoor events where attendees yell, chant, and sing even when social distancing.
Some people might not be able to wear a mask because of a disability or medical condition. These people might want to be particularly cautious about attending these events.
Masks should NOT be worn by children younger than two, people who have trouble breathing, or people who cannot remove the mask without assistance.
Social distance and limit physical contact

Avoid group events, such as games, competitions, or social gatherings, where spacing of at least 6 feet between people cannot be maintained.
Maintain a distance of at least 6 feet or more from people who don’t live in your household. Be particularly mindful in areas where it may be harder to keep this distance, such as ticketing and entrance areas, parking lots, restrooms, and routes of entry and exit.
Select seating or determine where to stand based on your ability to keep 6 feet of space from people who don’t live in your household.
If you have a disability, call or check ahead to ensure accessible seating is provided.
If therapy animals are invited to a facility or other setting, follow CDC guidance for service and therapy animals.
Avoid using restroom facilities or concession areas at high traffic times, such as intermission, half-time, or immediately after the event.
Don’t shake hands, give high-fives, do elbow bumps, or touch others because close contact increases the risk of getting COVID-19.
Limit indoor activities

Indoor activities increase the risk of the spread of COVID-19.
Avoid attending indoor events, if possible. If not possible, wear a mask and maintain a distance of at least six feet from people you don’t live with. Consider only attending events indoors that have made modifications to improve safety, such as
Adding physical barriers between spectators and players that protects from potential respiratory droplets during physical activity
Requiring and enforcing mask wearing
Discouraging shouting, chanting, singing, and other types of cheering, which can make respiratory droplets travel farther
Wash your hands and limit contact with frequently touched surfaces or shared items

Wash your hands for at least 20 seconds with soap and water or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before and after entering the facility and immediately after touching common surfaces such as handrails, doorknobs, countertops, phones, toilets, faucets, sinks, and concession counters.
Use cashless payment options when possible. If not available, make sure to wash your hands with soap and water or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol after transactions with cash or card.
Use no-touch waste baskets at the cash registers and in the restrooms whenever possible.
Safely eat and drink at sports events

There is no evidence that COVID-19 is spread by food. However, being in close contact to people poses a risk, such as when gathering around food service areas.
Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before and after eating and drinking and after using a shared container.
Attendees that are able to should wear a mask at all times, except when eating and drinking. Follow mask guidance for safely removing and storing mask.
Attendees should bring their own food and drinks, if possible and allowed by the event facility. Do not share food and drinks with others who do not live in your household. Avoid shared drinking fountains if you can.
Plan to eat and drink at designated times and not throughout the event, so you can wear a mask as much as possible.
When taking off your mask to eat or drink, be sure you are at least 6 feet away from others who don’t live in your household.
Eat outside, if possible.
Visit concession areas during off-peak times to avoid overcrowding. Stand at least 6 feet apart from others who are not in your household while waiting in line.
Wear a mask and keep 6 feet apart when standing in line at concessions.
Use single-use condiment packets, and avoid using shared condiment containers, if possible.
Use caution if consuming alcohol at a sporting event. Drinking alcohol can impair judgement and increase risk-taking behaviors. People may be less likely to practice COVID-19 preventive behaviors such as social distancing and wearing masks when they drink alcohol.
Safely support the team

Masks are strongly encouraged in settings where people might raise their voices, such as shouting, chanting, or singing. When someone raises their voice, their respiratory droplets spread farther.
Attendees should consider ways to safely cheer that do not involve shouting, chanting, or singing, such as stomping, clapping, or using handheld noise makers.
Follow guidelines established by the sports program

Make sure to follow any rules established by the sports program, such as staggered arrival and drop-off times or other rules to limit contact between different groups of players and fans or spectators.
Wait until a previous group has exited the facility completely before entering a facility to attend an event. This also allows for more time to clean and disinfect the facility between uses.
Sports programs are encouraged to limit attendance by non-essential visitors, including families, volunteers, and spectators. If a sports program has made the decision to limit attendance, be sure to follow these rules.
What to do if you become sick during a sports event

Organizations that host sporting events should designate an employee or office to be responsible for responding to COVID-19 concerns. If you become sick with COVID-19 symptoms during a sporting event, contact the designated employee or office. Staff at the sporting event will help you identify your next step, which may include safely returning home or going to a healthcare facility.
If there is not a designated person at the event, separate yourself from others and move to the identified isolation area, if available. If you need immediate medical attention, call 911 or call ahead to your local emergency facility and notify them that you are seeking care for someone who may have COVID-19. Avoid public transportation, ride-sharing or taxis, if you can.
After the sports event
What to do if you become sick after attending a sports event

If you develop symptoms consistent with COVID-19, such as fever, cough, or shortness of breath, or if you test positive for COVID-19, follow steps to prevent the spread of COVID-19. Also, immediately contact the designated contact at the sporting event or your local health department.
They may need to inform staff and other attendees about their possible exposure to the virus, while maintaining confidentiality as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or and other applicable laws and regulations.
Follow the CDC-recommended steps for what to do if you become sick, and follow the Public Health Recommendations for Community-Related Exposure.
If you are waiting for your COVID-19 test results, follow these important steps to help stop the spread of COVID-19:
Stay home and monitor your health.
Think about the people you have recently been around and write down any information you can remember.
Answer the phone call from the health department.
If you have been diagnosed with COVID-19, a public health worker may contact you to check on your health and ask you who you have been in contact with and where you’ve spent your time. Your information will be confidential. Learn more about what to expect with contact tracing.

***Food and Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
What you need to know
The risk of getting sick with COVID-19 from eating or handling food (including frozen food and produce) and food packages is considered very low.
Take everyday actions to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
Continue following basic steps for food safety and eat nutritious foods to take care of your physical and mental health.

Currently, there is no evidence to suggest that handling food or consuming food is associated with COVID-19.

Coronaviruses, like the one that causes COVID-19, are thought to spread mostly person-to-person through respiratory droplets when someone coughs, sneezes, or talks. It is possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object, including food or food packaging, that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes. However, this is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads.

After shopping, handling food packages, or before preparing or eating food, it is important to always wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer  that contains at least 60% alcohol. Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry. Remember, it is always important to follow good food safety practices to reduce the risk of illness from common foodborne pathogens.

Very low risk of getting COVID-19 from food and packaging or treated drinking water

The risk of getting COVID-19 from food you cook yourself or from handling and consuming food from restaurants and takeout or drive-thru meals is thought to be very low. Currently, there is no evidence that food is associated with spreading the virus that causes COVID-19.
The risk of infection by the virus from food products, food packaging, or bags is thought to be very low. Currently, no cases of COVID-19 have been identified where infection was thought to have occurred by touching food, food packaging, or shopping bags.
Although some people who work in food production and processing facilities have gotten COVID-19, there is no evidence of the virus spreading to consumers through the food or packaging that workers in these facilities may have handled.
Food safety in the kitchen
Use proper food safety practices when handling food and before, during and after preparing or eating food.

Currently, there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 spreads to people through food. However, it is important to safely handle and continue to cook foods to their recommended cooking temperatures to prevent foodborne illness.
The virus that causes COVID-19 has not been found in drinking water. The Environmental Protection Agency regulates water treatment plants to ensure that treated water is safe to drink.

Clean surfaces

Regularly clean kitchen counters and use a disinfectant product from EPA’s List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19) . Follow the manufacturer’s directions. Before preparing food on the kitchen counter, rinse disinfected surface with water. WARNING: Do not use disinfecting products on food or food packaging. Learn more about shopping for food during the COVID-19 pandemic.
If someone in your home is sick, clean and disinfect “high-touch” surfaces daily such as handles, kitchen countertops, faucets, light switches, and doorknobs.

Everyday handling of packaged food and fresh produce
The risk of infection by the virus from food products, food packaging, or bags is thought to be very low. Currently, no cases of COVID-19 have been identified where infection was thought to have occurred by touching food, food packaging, or shopping bags. It is always important to follow good food safety practices to reduce the risk of illness from common foodborne pathogens.

Handling packaged food

When unpacking groceries, refrigerate or freeze meat, poultry, eggs, seafood, and other perishables within 2 hours of purchasing.
Do NOT use disinfectants designed for hard surfaces, such as bleach or ammonia, on food packaged in cardboard or plastic wrap.
If reusable cloth bags become soiled, follow instructions for washing them, and dry them on the warmest appropriate setting.
Handling and cleaning fresh produce

Do NOT wash produce with soap, bleach, sanitizer, alcohol, disinfectant or any other chemical.
Gently rinse fresh fruits and vegetables under cold, running tap water.
Scrub uncut firm produce (e.g., potatoes, cucumbers, melons) with a clean brush, even if you don’t plan to eat the peel.
Salt, pepper, vinegar, lemon juice, and lime juice have not been shown to be effective at removing germs on produce.
Meal kits and delivery

Because of the COVID-19 outbreak and increases in demand, some deliveries have been delayed.
If you have a meal kit or frozen prepared meal delivery, check the temperature of any food that is normally kept in the refrigerator or freezer (such as milk, meat, and eggs) immediately after it is delivered,using a food thermometer and make sure the food is 40°F or below.
Refrigerate or freeze your delivery as soon as possible.
To help prevent the spread of COVID-19, pay online or on the phone when you order (if that is an option) and accept deliveries without in-person contact whenever possible.
For more information about meal kits and delivery food safety see​ Tips for Meal Kit and Food Delivery Safety.​

Bulk meat, poultry, and seafood purchasing and handling
In response to changes in the food supply chain, some meat and poultry manufacturers, restaurants, and restaurant suppliers have begun selling large amounts of meat, poultry, and seafood directly to consumers. While there is currently no evidence that food can spread the virus that causes COVID-19, there are other important considerations for bulk purchasing.

Harmful bacteria grow fastest between 41°F and 140°F. If you are picking up a meat, poultry or seafood order, bring a cooler and ice packs to keep food at 41°F or colder during transit.
Never allow meat, poultry or seafood that requires refrigeration to sit at room temperature for more than two hours. Never allow meat, poultry, or seafood that requires refrigeration to sit at room temperature for more than one hour if the air temperature is above 90°F.
Once you arrive home, meat, poultry and seafood items should either be prepared immediately or put in the refrigerator or freezer for safe storage.
In case of leaks in the packaging, bring a secondary container or place cases of meat, poultry, or seafood in an area of your vehicle that can be easily clean and sanitized. If leaks occur, thoroughly wash the surface with hot, soapy water or a bleach solution after it comes in contact with raw meat, poultry or seafood, or its juices.

Handling meat from wild animals
Currently, there is no evidence that you can get infected with the virus that causes COVID-19 by eating food, including wild hunted game meat. However, hunters can get infected with other diseases when processing or eating game. Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:
Do not harvest animals that appear sick or are found dead.
Keep game meat clean and cool the meat down as soon as possible after harvesting the animal.
Avoid cutting through the backbone and spinal tissues and do not eat the brains of any wild animal.
When handling and cleaning game:
Wear rubber or disposable gloves.
Do not eat, drink, or smoke.
When finished handling and cleaning game:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Clean knives, equipment, and surfaces that were in contact with game meat with soap and water and then you may choose to disinfect further. While these recommendations apply to general food safety practices, if you are concerned about COVID-19, you may use a product on EPA’s List N: Disinfectants for Coronavirus (COVID-19).
Cook all game meat thoroughly (to an internal temperature of 165°F or higher).
Raw wild meat or uncooked dishes containing the blood of wild animals should not be eaten, as such practices place people at high risk of contracting many types of infections.
Check with your state wildlife agency regarding any testing requirements for other diseases and for any specific instructions regarding preparing, transporting, and consuming game meat.

COVID-19 and nutrition for health
To help cope with stress that may be related to the pandemic, take care of your body including good nutrition, as part of self-care.
Dietary supplements aren’t meant to treat or prevent COVID-19. Certain vitamins and minerals (e.g., Vitamins C and D, zinc) may have effects on how our immune system works to fight off infections, as well as inflammation and swelling.
The best way to obtain these nutrients is through foods: Vitamin C in fruits and vegetables, Vitamin Din low-fat milk, fortified milk alternatives, and seafood, and zinc in lean meat, seafood, legumes, nuts, and seeds.
In some cases, dietary supplement may have unwanted effects, especially if taken in too large amounts, before surgery, or with other dietary supplements or medicines, or if you have certain health conditions.
If you are considering taking vitamins or dietary supplements, talk with your pharmacist, registered dietitian, or other healthcare provider before taking, especially when combining or substituting them with other foods or medicine.
With changes in food availability in some communities, you may be consuming more canned or packaged food. Tips on purchasing canned and packaged goods using the Nutrition Facts label are available. In addition, helpful food planning is available at MyPlate .
Getting the right amount of nutritious food like plenty of fruits and vegetables, lean protein, and whole grains is important for health. If you or your household need help in obtaining nutritious food, find additional resources at USDA Nutrition Assistance Program , or call the USDA National Hunger Hotline at 1-866-3-HUNGRY or 1-877-8-HAMBRE to speak with a representative who will find food resources such as meal sites, food banks, and other social services available near your location.
Managers of food pantries and food distribution sites can consider these steps to help ensure safe access to food for their clients while helping prevent the spread of COVID-19.

***Hiring In-Home Services or Repairs
What you need to know
Ask the service provider to wear a mask.
You and other household members should wear masks.
Stay at least 6 feet from the service provider, and limit interactions between the service provider and other household members and pets.
After the service is completed, clean and disinfect any surfaces in your home that may have been touched by the service provider.

CDC offers the following tips for staying safe and slowing the spread of COVID-19 while scheduling services or repairs inside the home. This may include installation and repair of plumbing, electrical, heating, or air conditioning systems; painting; or cleaning services.

In general, the closer and longer you interact with others, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread. Limiting close face-to-face contact and staying at least 6 feet away from other people is the best way to reduce the risk of COVID-19 infection, along with wearing masks and practicing everyday preventive actions. Before welcoming service providers into your home, consider these tips to help keep you, your family, and the service provider safe during in-home services or repairs:

Before the visit
heck with your local health department to see if there is a stay-at-home order in your state or local community that restricts non-essential activities or services. If a stay-at-home order is in effect in your community, consider if the service request is essential or if it can be delayed.
If you or someone in your home has COVID-19, has symptoms consistent with COVID-19, or has been in close contact with someone who has COVID-19, wait to schedule non-emergency services that require entry into your home until it is safe to be around others.
If you or someone in your home is at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, such as older adults or those with underlying medical conditions, consider not being inside the home during the service, or find someone else who can be in the home instead.
Do as much of the pre-service consultation as possible before the service provider arrives, to reduce the amount of time the service provider spends inside your home. For example, discuss the details of the service request on the phone or by email, and send pictures ahead of time.
Discuss any COVID-19 precautions the service provider is taking, including the use of masks for the duration of the service visit, any pre-screening procedures (such as temperature checks) and using the restroom during the service call.

During the visit
Do not allow service providers to enter your home if they seem sick or are showing symptoms of COVID-19.
Ask the service provider to wear a mask before entering your home and during the service visit. Also, you and other household members should wear a mask. Consider having clean, spare masks to offer to service providers if their mask becomes wet, contaminated or otherwise soiled during the service call.
Avoid physical greetings, for example, handshakes.
Minimize indoor conversations. All conversations with the service providers should take place outdoors, when possible, and physically distanced indoors, if necessary.
Maintain a distance of at least 6 feet from the service provider, and limit interactions between the service provider and other household members and pets.
During indoor services, take steps to maximize ventilation inside the home, such as turning on the air conditioner or opening windows in the area.

After the visit
If possible, use touchless payment options or pay over the phone to avoid touching money, a card, or a keypad. If you must handle money, a card, or use a keypad, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol after paying.
After the service is completed, clean and disinfect any surfaces in your home that may have been touched by the service provider.

***Travel During COVID-19

New Travel Requirements:

All air passengers coming to the United States, including U.S. citizens, are required to have a negative COVID-19 test result or documentation of recovery from COVID-19 before they board a flight to the United States. See the Frequently Asked Questions for more information.

Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.

Before You Consider Traveling
Travel increases your chance of spreading and getting COVID-19. CDC recommends that you do not travel at this time. Delay travel and stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

If you must travel, here are some important questions to ask yourself and your loved ones beforehand.

Are you, someone in your household, or someone you will be visiting at increased risk for getting very sick from COVID-19?
If you get infected you can spread the virus to loved ones during travel and when you return, even if you don’t have symptoms. If your household includes one or more individuals at increased risk for severe illness, all family members should act as if they, themselves are at increased risk. Learn how to protect yourself and others.
Are hospitals in your community or your destination overwhelmed with patients who have COVID-19? To find out, check state, territorial, and local department websites.
Does your home or destination have requirements or restrictions for travelers? Check state, territorial, and local requirements before you travel.
During the 14 days before your travel, have you or those you are visiting had close contact with people they don’t live with?
The following activities can put you at higher risk for COVID-19:
Going to a large social gathering like a wedding, funeral, or party.
Attending a mass gathering like a sporting event, concert, or parade.
Being in crowds like in restaurants, bars, fitness centers, or movie theaters.
Taking public transportation like planes, trains, or buses, or being in transportation hubs like airports.
Traveling on a cruise ship or riverboat.
Do your plans include traveling by bus, train, or air, which might make staying 6 feet apart difficult?
Are you traveling with people who don’t live with you?
If the answer to any of these questions is “yes,” you should delay your travel.

If You Must Travel
If you must travel, take these steps to protect yourself and others from COVID-19:

If you are eligible, get fully vaccinated for COVID-19. Wait 2 weeks after getting your second vaccine dose to travel—it takes time for your body to build protection after any vaccination.
Get tested with a viral test 1-3 days before you travel. Keep a copy of your test results with you during travel in case you are asked for them. Do NOT travel if you test positive.
Check travel restrictions before you go.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer (with at least 60% alcohol).
Bring extra supplies, such as masks and hand sanitizer.
Avoid contact with anyone who is sick.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth.
Do NOT travel if you were exposed to COVID-19, you are sick or you test positive for COVID-19. Learn when it is safe for you to travel. Don’t travel with someone who is sick.

Get Tested Before and After Travel
If you are traveling, get tested with a viral test 1-3 days before your trip. Make sure you have the results of your negative test before you travel. Keep a copy of your results with you during travel; you might be asked for them.
Do not travel if you test positive. Immediately isolate yourself, and follow public health recommendations.
Get tested again with a viral test 3-5 days after your trip and stay home and self-quarantine for a full 7 days after travel, even if your test is negative. If you don’t get tested, stay home and self-quarantine for 10 days after travel.
You may have been exposed to COVID-19 on your travels. Regardless of where you traveled or what you did during your trip, take these actions to protect others from getting COVID-19 after travel:
Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors. Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
If there are people in the household who did not travel with you, wear a mask and ask everyone in the household to wear masks in shared spaces inside your home for 14 days after travel.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness.
Watch your health: Look for symptoms of COVID-19.

Check Travel Restrictions
State, local, and territorial governments may have travel restrictions in place, including testing requirements, stay-at-home orders, and quarantine requirements upon arrival. For up-to-date information and travel guidance, check the state or territorial and local health department where you are, along your route, and where you are going. Prepare to be flexible during your trip as restrictions and policies may change during your travel. Follow all state, local, and territorial travel restrictions.

If traveling by air, check if your airline requires any health information, testing, or other documents. Local policies at your destination may require you to be tested for COVID-19. If you test positive on arrival, you may be required to isolate for a period of time.

All air passengers coming to the United States, including U.S. citizens, are required to have a negative COVID-19 test result or documentation of recovery from COVID-19 before boarding a flight to the United States. See the Frequently Asked Questions for more information.

After You Travel
You may have been exposed to COVID-19 on your travels. You may feel well and not have any symptoms, but you can still spread the virus to others. You and your travel companions (including children) may pose a risk to your family, friends, and community after your travel.

Get Tested and Stay Home After Travel

Get tested with a viral test 3-5 days after travel AND stay home and self-quarantine for a full 7 days after travel.
Even if you test negative, stay home and self-quarantine for the full 7 days.
If your test is positive, isolate yourself to protect others from getting infected.
If you don’t get tested, stay home and self-quarantine for 10 days after travel.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness for 14 days, whether you get tested or not.
Follow all state and local recommendations or requirements after travel.

Also, take these actions after you return from travel to protect others from getting COVID-19:

Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
If there are people in the household who did not travel with you, wear a mask  and ask everyone in the household to wear masks in shared spaces inside your home for 14 days after travel.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness.
Watch your health: Look for symptoms of COVID-19.
Considerations for Types of Travel
Travel increases your chances of spreading and getting COVID-19. Delay travel and stay home. If you must travel, consider which activities you will be doing and their risk.

The type of transportation you use, type of accommodation you stay in, and the activities you do during travel, can increase your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19.  Your chances of getting or spreading COVID-19 while traveling also depend on whether you and those around you take steps to protect yourselves and others, by wearing masks, avoiding crowds, and staying 6 feet from anyone who is not traveling with you (social distancing). Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.

Airports, bus and train stations, and rest stops are all places travelers can be exposed to the virus in the air and on surfaces. These are also places where it can be hard to social distance. In general, the longer you are around a person with COVID-19, the more likely you are to get infected.

Air travel
Air travel requires spending time in security lines and airport terminals, which can bring you in close contact with other people and frequently touched surfaces. Most viruses and other germs do not spread easily on flights because of how air is circulated and filtered on airplanes. However, social distancing is difficult on crowded flights and sitting within 6 feet of others, sometimes for hours, may increase your risk of getting COVID-19. How you get to and from the airport, such as with public transportation and ridesharing, can also increase your chances of being exposed to the virus.
Bus or train travel
Traveling on buses and trains for any length of time can involve being in crowded terminals and sitting or standing within 6 feet of others, which may increase your risk of getting COVID-19. If you choose to travel by bus or train, learn what you can do to protect yourself on public transportation.
Car travel
Making stops along the way for gas, food, or bathroom breaks can put you and your traveling companions in close contact with other people and frequently touched surfaces.
RV travel
You may have to stop less often for food or bathroom breaks, but RV travel usually means staying at RV parks overnight and getting gas and supplies at other public places. These stops may put you and those with you in the RV in close contact with others.

Learn more about how to protect yourself from COVID-19 on different types of transportation.
Considerations for Staying with Family or Friends
If you, someone you live with, or anyone you plan to visit is at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19,  delay travel and stay home. If you must travel, stay in a separate accommodation like a hotel, guest house, or short-stay rental.

Tips for staying overnight or hosting overnight guests

Wear masks while in shared spaces inside the house. Masks may be removed for eating, drinking, and sleeping, but individuals from different households should stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arms lengths) away from each other at all times.
Wash hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, especially upon arrival.
Improve ventilation by opening windows and doors or by placing central air and heating on continuous circulation.
Spend time together outdoors. Take a walk or sit outdoors at least 6 feet apart for interpersonal interactions.
Avoid singing or shouting, especially indoors.
Be prepared. Know what you will do if you, a family member or friend becomes sick during the visit. Make plans for isolation, medical care, basic care, and quarantining exposed people.

Tips to avoid getting and spreading COVID-19 in common travel situations:
In public:

Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who is not traveling with you.
Bathrooms and rest stops:

Wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds after using the bathroom and after you have been in a public place.
If soap and water are not available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
Getting gas:

Use disinfecting wipes on handles and buttons at the gas pumps before you touch them.
After fueling, use a hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol. When you get to your destination, wash your hands with soap and water for at least 20 seconds.
Hotels and accommodations:

See advice for traveling overnight.
Food stops:

The safest option is to bring your own food. If you don’t bring your own food, use drive-through, delivery, take-out, and curb-side pick-up options.

***Testing and International Air Travel

Air travel requires spending time in security lines and airport terminals, which can bring you in close contact with other people and frequently touched surfaces. Social distancing is difficult in busy airports and on crowded flights, and sitting within 6 feet of others, sometimes for hours, may increase your risk of getting COVID-19. How you get to and from the airport, such as with public transportation and ridesharing, can also increase your chances of being exposed to the virus.

Testing before and after travel can reduce the risk of spreading COVID-19. Testing does not eliminate all risk, but when paired with a period of staying at home and everyday precautions like wearing masks and social distancing, it can make travel safer by reducing spread on planes, in airports, and at destinations.

Here’s what to know:

Plan ahead: Make sure you understand and follow all airline and destination requirements related to travel, testing, or quarantine, which may differ from U.S. requirements. If you do not follow your destination’s requirements, you may be denied entry and required to return to the United States.
All air passengers coming to the United States, including U.S. citizens, are required to have a negative COVID-19 test result or documentation of recovery from COVID-19 before boarding a flight to the United States.
Make sure that you will be able to get a test at your destination before your return to the United States. Always check and follow state and local recommendations or requirements related to travel in addition to federal requirements.
Get tested with a viral test 1-3 days before you travel. Keep a copy of your test results with you during travel in case you are asked for them. Check and follow destination testing requirements—they may require specific types of tests.
Don’t travel if you test positive; immediately isolate yourself and follow public health recommendations
Delay your travel if you are waiting for test results.
Get tested 3-5 days after travel AND stay home and self-quarantine for 7 days after travel.
Even if you test negative, stay home and self-quarantine for the full 7 days.
If you don’t get tested, it’s safest to stay home for 10 days after travel.
If you are eligible, get fully vaccinated for COVID-19. Wait 2 weeks after getting your second vaccine dose to travel—it takes time for your body to build protection after any vaccination.
Plan Ahead
Check if your airline or destination requires any health information, testing, or other documents. Some destinations require testing before travel and/or after arrival. If you do not follow your destination’s requirements, you may be denied entry and required to return to the United States. You may have to pay any related airline fees. If you test positive at your destination, you might be required to isolate. You might be delayed from returning to the United States as scheduled.

Information about testing requirements for your destination may be available from the Office of Foreign Affairs or Ministry of Health, or the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, Country Information webpage .

Take steps to reduce higher-risk activities for 14 days before your trip and get tested 1-3 days before you travel. Testing before travel could help reduce the chance that your travel will be interrupted or delayed by COVID-19.

Do NOT travel if you were exposed to COVID-19, you are sick, or you have tested positive for COVID-19. Learn when it is safe for you to travel. Don’t travel with someone who is sick.
Get Tested Before Your Flight
Below is what you need to know about getting tested before your international flight.

Get tested with a viral test 1-3 days before your trip and again no more than 3 days before your return flight to the United States departs.
Make sure you get your test results before you travel. If you are waiting for results, delay your travel.
Do not travel if your test result is positive; immediately isolate yourself, and follow public health recommendations.
A negative test does not mean that you were not exposed or that you will not develop COVID-19. Make sure to wear a mask, avoid crowds, stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from others, wash your hands, and watch your health for signs of illness while traveling.
Keep a copy of your test results with you during travel. You may be asked for them.
Check your destination’s testing requirements before you depart—they may require specific types of tests. If you do not follow your destination’s requirements, you may be denied entry and required to return to the United States.

Get Tested and Stay Home After Travel
Get tested with a viral test 3-5 days after travel AND stay home and self-quarantine for a full 7 days after travel.
Even if you test negative, stay home and self-quarantine for the full 7 days.
If your test is positive, isolate yourself to protect others from getting infected.
If you don’t get tested, stay home and self-quarantine for 10 days after travel.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness for 14 days, whether you get tested or not.
Follow all state and local recommendations or requirements after travel.

Also, take these actions after you return from travel to protect others from getting COVID-19:

Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
If there are people in the household who did not travel with you, wear a mask and ask everyone in the household to wear masks in shared spaces inside your home for 14 days after travel.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness.
Watch your health: Look for symptoms of COVID-19.

Frequently Asked Questions
Where do I get tested?
Visit your state, territorial, tribal and local  health department’s website to look for the latest information on where to get tested.

When do I need to get a test to travel to the United States and what kind of test do I need?
Get tested no more than 3 days before your flight to the United States departs. Make sure to be tested with a viral test (NAAT or antigen test) to determine if you are currently infected with COVID-19. Also, make sure that you receive your results before your flight departs and have documentation of your results to show the airline.

Do state and local governments in the United States have separate testing requirements for air passengers?
Federal testing requirements must be met to board a plane to the United States. Some state and local governments may have similar or more restrictive testing requirements for air passengers arriving in their jurisdictions. Always check and follow state and local recommendations or requirements related to travel in addition to federal requirements.

Where can I get a test overseas?
For information on where to obtain a test overseas, travelers should review the relevant U.S. Embassy website . Travelers may need to consider a routing change to a different country or city in order to meet the testing requirement.

Do international destinations have testing requirements for air passengers?
Plan ahead and check for any health information, testing, or other documentation required by your airline or destination. Many countries have testing requirements and only accept specific types of tests. If you do not follow your destination’s requirements, you may be denied entry and required to return to the United States. You may have to pay any related airline fees.

What if I have had a COVID-19 vaccine or have tested positive for antibodies? Do I still need a negative COVID-19 test or documentation of recovery from COVID-19 to enter the United States?
Yes, at this time all air passengers traveling to the United States, regardless of vaccination or antibody status, are required to provide a negative COVID-19 test result or documentation of recovery.

What else should I do before I travel to protect myself and others from COVID-19?
For 14 days before you travel, take everyday precautions like wearing masks, social distancing, and handwashing, and avoid the following activities that put you at higher risk for COVID-19:

Going to a large social gathering like a wedding, funeral, or party.
Attending a mass gathering like a sporting event, concert, or parade.
Being in crowds like in restaurants, bars, fitness centers, or movie theaters.
Taking public transportation like planes, trains or buses or being in transportation hubs like airports.
Traveling on a cruise ship or river boat.
Is one test enough to prevent spread during my travel?
CDC recommends getting tested 1-3 days before your flight AND 3-5 days after your trip AND stay home and self-quarantine for 7 days. Even if you test negative, stay home and self-quarantine for the full 7 days. If you don’t get tested, stay home and self-quarantine for 10 days. Getting tested in combination with staying home significantly reduces travelers’ risk of spreading COVID-19.

What if I recently recovered from COVID-19?
CDC does not recommend getting tested again in the 3 months after a positive viral test, as long as you do not have symptoms of COVID-19. If you have had a positive viral test in the past 3 months, and you have met the criteria to end isolation, travel with a copy of your positive test result and a letter from your doctor or health department that states you have been cleared for travel. You will need to show this documentation of recovery from COVID-19 before you board a flight to the United States.

***Know When Not to Travel to Avoid Spreading COVID-19

Travel increases your chance of spreading and getting COVID-19. CDC recommends that you do not travel at this time. Postpone travel and stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

Some people should not travel. People who are sick, have recently tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19, or have been exposed to a person with COVID-19 pose a very high risk to others during travel. This page gives advice on when and how long these people should postpone travel to avoid spreading infection.

Don’t travel if you or any of your travel companions:
Are sick
Have suspected or diagnosed COVID-19 (even if you don’t have symptoms)
Have been around someone with suspected or diagnosed COVID-19 in the past 14 days (even if they did not have symptoms).
CDC can restrict the travel of people known or believed to have COVID-19, or who have been exposed to a person with COVID-19, if they plan to travel. State, local, and territorial health departments and foreign public health authorities can also restrict travel of infected or exposed people within their jurisdictions.
Getting trip cancellation insurance might help ensure you are able to make a last-minute cancellation or change your itinerary without losing money on flights, cruises, train tickets, or pre-paid lodgings.
For all travel, take preventive measures to protect yourself and others, such as wearing a mask for the duration of your trip. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
Traveling Internationally? All air passengers coming to the United States, including U.S. citizens, are required to have a negative COVID-19 test result or documentation of recovery from COVID-19 before boarding a flight to the United States. See the Frequently Asked Questions for more information.
When to Postpone your Travel
The COVID-19 pandemic may be stressful for people. Traveling with or to visit family or friends can be a stress reliever, but it also increases your chances of getting and spreading COVID-19. You don’t want to miss out on a planned trip, but there are situations when cancelling or postponing travel makes sense for you and those you care about. Postponing your trip when you could spread COVID-19 also protects other travelers, people who work in travel settings, and those at your destination.

Check these common scenarios to see if you or your travel companions should postpone your travel. This list does not include all possible situations. Talk to your health care provider before you travel if you are unsure whether any of these situations apply to you or your travel companions. CDC will continue to update this information as we learn more about COVID-19.

Scenario 1: Are you or your travel companions sick with fever, cough, or other symptoms of COVID-19?
Sick with fever, cough, or other symptoms of COVID-19
Don’t travel or cross borders while sick. Stay home and isolate yourself from others until it’s safe for you to end home isolation.   

If you need to travel to get medical care, the safest way to travel is by ambulance, air ambulance, or private vehicle. If you use paratransit services, call ahead to notify the service of your illness so they can take precautions to protect the driver and other staff; no other passengers should share the vehicle. Wear a mask while around others. Don’t travel on commercial vehicles (bus, taxi, rideshare), trains, airplanes, ships, or boats while sick.

If you test negative for COVID-19 but you are still sick, postpone your travel until you’re well – other contagious diseases can spread through travel, too. If you have a fever (feel feverish or have a temperature of 100.4oF [38oC] or higher), wait at least 24 hours after your fever is gone without using fever-reducing medications.

If you test positive for COVID-19, see Scenario 2.

Scenario 2: Have you or your travel companions recently tested positive for COVID-19 with a viral test?
Recently tested positive for COVID-19 with a viral test
Don’t travel while infectious with COVID-19 even if you don’t have symptoms. Stay home and isolate yourself from others. Postpone your travel until it’s safe for you to end home isolation.

If you need to travel to get medical care, the safest way to travel is by ambulance, air ambulance, or private vehicle. If you use paratransit services, call ahead to notify the service of your positive test so that they can take precautions to protect the driver and other staff; no other passengers should share the vehicle. Wear a mask while around others. Don’t travel on commercial vehicles (bus, taxi, rideshare), trains, airplanes, ships or boats if you have (or think you may have) COVID-19.

Scenario 3: Did you or your travel companions have close contact with a person with COVID-19 in the past 14 days?
Close contact with a person with COVID-19 in the past 14 days*
Close contact with a person with COVID-19 in the past 14 days*
*People who have had COVID-19 within the past 3 months do not need to self-quarantine, unless they have new symptoms of COVID-19.
Do not travel, and quarantine by separating yourself from others.

During your quarantine period

If you get sick, isolate yourself from others, get tested for COVID-19, and postpone your travel until it’s safe for you to end home isolation.
If you need to travel to get medical care, the safest way to travel is by ambulance, air ambulance, or private vehicle. If you use paratransit services, call ahead to notify the service of your close contact with a person with COVID-19 (and your illness, if you are sick) so that they can take precautions to protect the driver and other staff; no other passengers should share the vehicle. Wear a mask while around others. Don’t travel on commercial vehicles (bus, taxi, rideshare), trains, airplanes, ships or boats if you have (or think you may have) COVID-19.
If you test positive for COVID-19, see Scenario 2.
If you test negative for COVID-19, you should still finish your quarantine period before traveling.

Scenario 4: Are you or your travel companions waiting for a COVID-19 viral test result?
Waiting for a COVID-19 viral test result
A viral test checks for current infection.

Do not travel until you get your test results.

If you test positive for COVID-19, see Scenario 2.

If you test negative for COVID-19, check Scenarios 1 and 3 to make sure you don’t have another reason to postpone your travel.

If you happen to travel before you get your results, and your test comes back positive while you’re at your destination

You will need to isolate yourself from others, including your travel companions, and postpone your return until it’s safe for you to end home isolation.
Your travel companions will need to self-quarantine and postpone their travel back home. Their quarantine period will start after you start to self-isolate from them. If you don’t self-isolate from your travel companions, their quarantine period will start after you have recovered from COVID-19.
If you or your travel companions make plans to travel before it’s safe, public health authorities can restrict your travel.

***Know Your Travel Risk

Travel increases your chances of getting and spreading COVID-19. CDC recommends that you do not travel at this time. Delay travel and stay home to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

If you must travel, learn which travel activities are safer and take the following steps to protect yourself and others from COVID-19. Keep in mind that getting from one place to another is just one piece of the travel risk. Your activities and who you interact with before, during, and after travel may increase your risk.

If you are eligible, get fully vaccinated for COVID-19. Wait 2 weeks after getting your second vaccine dose to travel—it takes time for your body to build protection after any vaccination.
Get tested with a viral test 1-3 days before you travel. Keep a copy of your test results with you during travel in case you are asked for them. Do NOT travel if you test positive.
Check travel restrictions before you go.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer (with at least 60% alcohol).
Bring extra supplies, such as masks and hand sanitizer.
Avoid contact with anyone who is sick.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth.
Know when you should not travel. Do not travel if you or your travel companions are sick, have tested positive for COVID-19, or were exposed to a person with COVID-19.

The transportation you use, type of accommodation you stay in, and the activities you do during travel can increase your risk of getting and spreading COVID-19. Your chances of getting or spreading COVID-19 while traveling also are higher if you come into close contact with others, especially people you don’t know, or use shared public facilities like restrooms. COVID-19 is spreading in the United States and in many international destinations. Visiting locations where there are fewer cases of COVID-19 may be safer than visiting locations where there are more cases of COVID-19.

All air passengers coming to the United States, including U.S. citizens, are required to have a negative COVID-19 test result or documentation of recovery from COVID-19 before boarding a flight to the United States. See the Frequently Asked Questions  for more information.

Transportation
Your chances of getting COVID-19 while traveling depends not only on the length of the trip and the number of stops, but also on whether you and those around you take precautions, such as wearing masks and staying at least 6 feet /2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from other people. Airports, bus and train stations, and rest stops are all places travelers can be exposed to the virus through respiratory droplets or on surfaces. These are also places where it can be hard to keep your distance. In general, the longer you are around a person with COVID-19, even if they do not have symptoms, the more likely you are to get infected.

When traveling wear a mask for the duration of your trip and at your destination. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.

During car travel, making stops along the way for gas, food, or bathroom breaks can put you and your traveling companions in close contact with other people and frequently touched surfaces. If traveling in a RV, you may have to stop less often for food or bathroom breaks, but you could still be in close contact with others while staying at RV parks overnight and while getting gas and supplies at public places.

Traveling on buses and trains for any length of time can involve sitting or standing within 6 feet/2 meters of others, which may increase your risk of getting COVID-19. If you choose to travel by bus or train, learn what you can do to protect yourself on public transportation.

Air travel requires spending time in security lines and airport terminals, which can bring you in close contact with other people and frequently touched surfaces. Most viruses and other germs do not spread easily on flights because of how air circulates and is filtered on airplanes. However, keeping your distance is difficult on crowded flights, and sitting within 6 feet/2 meters of others, sometimes for hours, may make you more likely to get COVID-19.

Safest
Staying home is the best way to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.
Short trips by car with members of your household with no stops along the way
Less Safe
Longer trips by car or RV with one or more stops along the way
Even Less Safe
Trips by car or RV with people who are not in your household
Long-distance train or bus trips
Direct flights
Least Safe
Flights with layovers
Traveling on a cruise ship or river boat

Safest
Interacting with household members only (indoors and outdoors)
Less Safe
Interacting with a few people who are not from your household, if:

All are from the local area
You meet outdoors
All wear a mask
All stay at least 6 feet away from people they do not live with
No one shares food, drinks or personal items with people they don’t live with
Even Less Safe
Interacting with a few people, if:

People are from neighboring or other communities
You meet in an open, well-ventilated indoor space
Most (not all) wear a mask
Most stay at least 6 feet away from people they do not live with
Most limit sharing of food and personal items with others
Least Safe
Interacting with crowds, especially if:

People travel from distant communities or the crowd is made up of people from different places
Spread of COVID-19 is high in the community
You meet in a confined, poorly ventilated indoor space
Few people wear a mask
No one stays at least 6 feet/2meters away from people they do not live with
People freely share food and personal items with others

Safest
Staying home is the best way to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.
Less Safe
A house or cabin with people from your household (e.g., vacation rentals)
Even Less Safe
Hotels or multi-unit guest lodgings (e.g., bed and breakfasts)
Staying at a family member’s or friend’s home
A house or cabin with people that are not in your household (e.g., vacation rentals)
Least Safe
Shared spaces with many people and shared bathroom facilities (e.g., dormitory-style hostels)

Food
The more closely you interact with others, the more people you interact with, and the longer those interactions, the more likely COVID-19 will spread. Your chances of getting COVID-19 while eating out also depends on whether you and those around you take steps to protect yourself and others, such as wearing masks and staying 6 feet/2 meters away from people outside your household. Dining options that involve touching shared serving utensils, handles, buttons, or touchscreens also make you more likely to be exposed. Before dining at a restaurant, check the restaurant’s COVID-19 prevention practices.

Safest
Bringing your own food and drinks
Using drive-thru, delivery, and curbside pick-up options
Wear a mask when interacting with restaurant employees
Less Safe
Picking up take-out food or drink inside of a restaurant
Eating outside at a restaurant where:
Distancing at least 6 feet/2meters is possible
Servers and other restaurant staff wear masks
Diners wear masks when not eating or drinking
Self-service options that minimize touching of surfaces, such as touchless drink dispensers
Even Less Safe
Eating inside at a restaurant where:
Dining area is well ventilated
Distancing at least 6 feet/2meters is possible
Servers and other restaurant staff wear masks
Diners wear masks when not eating or drinking
Self-service options that require limited touching of surfaces, such as touch-screen drink dispensers or use of touchpads for ordering
Least Safe
Eating inside at a restaurant where:
Dining area is poorly ventilated
Distancing at least 6 feet/2 meters is not possible
Where servers and restaurant staff do not wear masks
Diners do not wear masks
Self-service options that require extensive touching of surfaces, such as buffets

Camping
The more closely you interact with others, the more people you interact with, and the longer those interactions, the more likely COVID-19 is to spread. When camping, it is important that you follow steps to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.

Safest
Staying home is the best way to protect yourself and others from COVID-19.
Less Safe
Camping with people from your household only and not sharing facilities with persons outside of your household
All wear masks when interacting with people they do not live with
Even Less Safe
Camping with people from your household only, but sharing facilities with people outside of your household, where distancing at least 6 feet/2 meters is possible
Camping with friends or family who are not in your household and sharing tents or cabins with them
Most (not all) wear a mask when interacting with people they do not live with
Least Safe
Camping in large dormitory-style settings with many people and shared facilities
Few wear a mask when interacting with people they do not live with

After You Travel
You may have been exposed to COVID-19 on your travels. You may feel well and not have any symptoms, but you can still spread the virus to others. You and your travel companions (including children) may pose a risk to your family, friends, and community after your travel.

Get Tested and Stay Home After Travel
Get tested with a viral test 3-5 days after travel AND stay home and self-quarantine  for a full 7 days after travel.
Even if you test negative, stay home and self-quarantine for the full 7 days.
If your test is positive, isolate yourself to protect others from getting infected.
If you don’t get tested, stay home and self-quarantine for 10 days after travel.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness for 14 days, whether you get tested or not.
Follow all state and local recommendations or requirements after travel.

Also, take these actions after you return from travel to protect others from getting COVID-19:

Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
If there are people in the household who did not travel with you, wear a mask  and ask everyone in the household to wear masks in shared spaces inside your home for 14 days after travel.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness.
Watch your health: Look for symptoms of COVID-19.

Requirement for Face Masks on Public Transportation Conveyances and at Transportation Hubs

Traveling on public transportation increases a person’s risk of getting and spreading COVID-19 by bringing people in close contact with others, often for prolonged periods, and exposing them to frequently touched surfaces. Air travel often requires spending time in security lines and busy airport terminals. Travel by bus, train, and other conveyances used for international, interstate, or intrastate transportation poses similar challenges. Staying 6 feet away from others is often difficult on public transportation.  People may not be able to distance themselves by the recommended at least 6 feet from other people seated nearby or from those standing in or passing through the aisles on airplanes, trains, or buses.

Travel has led—and continues to lead to—interstate and international spread of the virus that causes COVID-19.  Wearing masks that completely cover the mouth and nose reduce the spread of COVID-19. People who never develop symptoms (asymptomatic) or are not yet showing symptoms (pre-symptomatic) might not know that they are infected but can still spread COVID-19 to others. Masks also offer protection to the wearer.

CDC has issued an order that requires face masks to be worn by all travelers while on public transportation (which includes all passengers and all personnel operating conveyances). People must wear masks that completely cover both the mouth and nose while awaiting, boarding, disembarking, or traveling on airplanes, ships, ferries, trains, subways, buses, taxis, and ride-shares as they are traveling into, within, or out of the United States and U.S. territories. People must also wear masks while at transportation hubs (e.g., airports, bus or ferry terminals, train and subway stations, seaports) and other locations where people board public transportation in the United States and U.S. territories.

Operators of public conveyances and transportation hubs must use best efforts to ensure that any person on the conveyance wears a mask when boarding, disembarking, and for the duration of travel or while entering or on the premises of the transportation hub. Depending on the circumstances, operators must take the following actions:

Board/allow entry only people who wear masks;
instruct people that wearing a mask on the conveyance/premises is a requirement of federal law and that not complying with the requirement is a violation of federal law;
monitor the conveyance/premises for any person who is not wearing a mask and seek compliance from such a person;
at the earliest safe opportunity, disembark/remove from premises any person who refuses to comply; and
notify people of the requirement to make sure they aware of and comply with the requirement to wear a mask. Examples of such notifications are messaging in apps, on websites or through email; posters in multiple languages with illustrations; and printing the information on tickets.
People are not required to wear a mask under the following circumstances:

while eating, drinking, or taking medication for brief periods of time;
while communicating, for brief periods of time, with a person who is hearing impaired when the ability to see the mouth is essential for communication;
if, on an aircraft, wearing of oxygen masks is needed because of loss of cabin pressure or other event affecting aircraft ventilation;
if unconscious (for reasons other than sleeping), incapacitated, unable to be awakened, or otherwise unable to remove the mask without assistance; or
when necessary to temporarily remove the mask to verify one’s identity such as during Transportation Security Administration (TSA) screening or when asked to do so by the ticket or gate agent or any law enforcement official.
The following categories of people are exempt from the requirement to wear a mask:

A child under the age of 2 years;
A person with a disability who cannot wear a mask, or cannot safely wear a mask, for reasons related to the disability;
A person for whom wearing a mask would create a risk to workplace health, safety, or job duty as determined by the relevant workplace safety guidelines or federal regulations.
People on board the following categories of conveyances are exempt from the requirement to wear a mask:

Private conveyances operated only for personal, non-commercial use;
Commercial motor vehicles or trucks, if the driver is the only person in the vehicle or truck;
Conveyances operated by the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) as long as the operator of the conveyance follows all DOD requirements to prevent spread of COVID-19.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is a public transportation conveyance?
A public transportation conveyance is any mode of transportation other than a private vehicle. Types of public transportation conveyances include airplanes, trains, subways, buses, taxis, ride-shares, ferries, ships, trolleys, and cable cars.

Which public transportation conveyances does the order apply to?
The order applies to all public transportation conveyances traveling into the United States (i.e., arriving from a foreign country) or within the United States (including within states or territories or traveling between states or territories). It also applies to all conveyances leaving the United States until they arrive at a foreign destination.

Are masks required on school buses?
Yes, passengers and drivers on school buses must wear a mask. Drivers do not need to wear a mask if they are the only person on the bus.

Public school buses are included because the Order applies to transportation conveyances operated by state and local governments. Private school buses are included because these are transportation conveyances operated for a non-personal, commercial use (i.e., in connection with a fee).

What kind of mask should I wear?
People should wear masks that completely cover the mouth and nose and fits snugly against the sides of the face. See CDC’s guidance for attributes of masks needed to fulfill the requirements of the Order. For more information about masks, see Your Guide to Masks.

Can I wear a face shield instead of a mask?
Face shields do not fulfill the requirements of the Order. Face shields may be worn in addition to a mask that fulfills the requirements of the Order, but face shields may not be worn instead of a mask. A face shield is effective at protecting the person wearing it from splashes to the face, particularly the eyes, but face shields do not protect others from respiratory droplets exhaled by the wearer. A face shield worn without a mask also does not protect the person wearing it from inhaling respiratory droplets.

What is a transportation hub?
A transportation hub is any location where people gather to await, board, or disembark public transportation. This include airports, bus and ferry terminals, marinas, train and subway stations, seaports, and ride-share pick-up locations.

Which transportation hubs does the order apply to?
The order applies to all transportation hubs in the United States and U.S. territories, except those operated by the U.S. Department of Defense.

Who is an operator of a public transportation conveyance?
A public transportation conveyance operator is any individual or organization causing or authorizing the operation of a conveyance and includes the transportation company, as well as crew, drivers, conductors, ticket takers, and other workers involved in the operation of the conveyance.

What happens if I don’t wear a mask on a public transportation conveyance?
Operators of public transportation conveyances must refuse to board anyone not wearing a mask that completely covers the mouth and nose and require that everyone on board wears a mask for the entire duration of travel. If a passenger refuses to comply, the operator must disembark the person at the earliest safe opportunity.

What happens if I don’t wear a mask in a transportation hub?
Operators of public transportation conveyances must deny entry to anyone not wearing a mask that completely covers the mouth and nose and require that everyone on the premises wears a mask. If a person refuses to comply, the operator must remove the person from the premises at the earliest safe opportunity.

What if I need to take my mask off during travel or in a transportation hub?
There are some circumstances when taking your mask off would be necessary, including brief periods of time while eating, drinking, or taking medication. Other reasons include medical emergencies, to verify identity during security screenings, or if asked to do so by ticket/gate agents or law enforcement. On a plane, masks should be removed if oxygen masks are needed because of loss of cabin pressure.

If you touch your mask while wearing or removing, wash hands with water and soap for 20 seconds or use hand sanitizer.

Do workers at transportation hubs need to wear masks at all times or only when they can’t social distance?
Employees must wear a mask while on the premises of a transportation hub unless they are only person in the work area, such as in private offices, private hangars at airports, or in railroad yards.

Employees are also exempted from the mask requirement if wearing a mask would create a risk to workplace health, safety, or job duty as determined by the relevant workplace safety guidelines or federal regulations.

Do I need to wear a mask if I have recovered from COVID-19?
Yes, the order requires all travelers to wear a mask, including those who have recovered from COVID-19.

Do I need to wear a mask if I have had a COVID-19 vaccine?
Yes, the order requires all travelers to wear a mask, including those who have been vaccinated against COVID-19.

What if another person near me refuses to wear a mask?
If you are on a conveyance and a passenger near you refuses to wear a mask, alert personnel working on the conveyance (e.g., crew member, driver, conductor) for assistance. If you are in a transportation hub, notify a staff member or security personnel.

Why is CDC making this a requirement now?
Scientific evidence shows that consistent and universal use of masks on public transportation systems and in transportation hubs will protect Americans and help to reduce the spread of COVID-19. Mask use will enable Americans to travel responsibly and as safely as possible when they need to travel during the pandemic.

***After You Travel

You may have been exposed to COVID-19 on your travels. You may feel well and not have any symptoms, but you can be contagious without symptoms and spread the virus to others. You and your travel companions (including children) pose a risk to your family, friends, and community for 14 days after you travel.

Get Tested and Stay Home After Travel
Get tested with a viral test 3-5 days after travel AND stay home and self-quarantine for a full 7 days after travel.
Even if you test negative, stay home and self-quarantine for the full 7 days.
If your test is positive, isolate yourself to protect others from getting infected.
If you don’t get tested, stay home and self-quarantine for 10 days after travel.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness for 14 days, whether you get tested or not.
Follow all state and local recommendations or requirements after travel.

Also, take these actions after you return from travel to protect others from getting COVID-19:

Avoid crowds and stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who did not travel with you. It’s important to do this everywhere — both indoors and outdoors.
Wear a mask over your nose and mouth when in public settings. Masks are required on planes, buses, trains, and other forms of public transportation traveling into, within, or out of the United States and in U.S. transportation hubs such as airports and stations.
If there are people in the household who did not travel with you, wear a mask and ask everyone in the household to wear masks in shared spaces inside your home for 14 days after travel.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness.
Watch your health: Look for symptoms of COVID-19.
Getting tested after travel is especially important if you did any of these activities that put you at higher risk for COVID-19:

Going to a large social gathering like a wedding, funeral, or party.
Attending a mass gathering like a sporting event, concert, or parade.
Being in crowds like in restaurants, bars, fitness centers, or movie theaters.
Taking public transportation like planes, trains or buses or being in transportation hubs like airports.
Traveling on a cruise ship or riverboat.
What to Do if You Get Sick After Travel or Test Positive
If you get sick with fever, cough, or other symptoms of COVID-19, or test positive:

Isolate if you are sick. Stay home and take other precautions. Avoid contact with others until it’s safe for you to end home isolation.
Don’t travel when you are sick.
You might have COVID-19. If you do, know that most people are able to recover at home without medical care.
Stay in touch with your doctor. Call before you go to a doctor’s office or emergency room and let them know you might have COVID-19.
If you have an emergency warning sign (including trouble breathing), get emergency medical care immediately.
If you live in close quarters with others, take additional precautions to protect them.
If you have a medical appointment that cannot be postponed, call your doctor’s office and tell them you have or may have COVID-19. This will help people in the office protect themselves and other patients. See CDC’s page on What to Do If You Are Sick for more details.

***COVID-19 and Cruise Ship Travel

Key Points for Cruise Ship Travelers

CDC recommends that all people avoid travel on cruise ships, including river cruises, worldwide, because the risk of COVID-19 on cruise ships is very high. It is especially important that people with an increased risk of severe illness avoid travel on cruise ships, including river cruises.
Cruise passengers are at increased risk of person-to-person spread of infectious diseases, including COVID-19, and outbreaks of COVID-19 have been reported on cruise ships.
Passengers who decide to go on a cruise should get tested 3-5 days after your trip AND stay home for 7 days after travel. Even if you test negative, stay home for the full 7 days.
If you don't get tested, it's safest to stay home for 10 days after you travel.  
What is the current situation?

On October 30, 2020, CDC issued a Framework for Conditional Sailing Order for cruise ships operating or seeking to operate in U.S. waters. This Order introduces a phased approach for resuming passenger cruises. Passenger operations continue to be suspended during the initial phases of this Order. The initial phase requires crew screening to determine the prevalence of COVID-19 among all crew members currently on cruise ships in U.S. waters.

At this time, CDC still recommends avoiding any travel on cruise ships, including river cruises, worldwide, because the risk of COVID-19 on cruise ships is very high. It is especially important that people with an increased risk of severe illness avoid travel on cruise ships, including river cruises.

Cruise passengers are at increased risk of person-to-person spread of infectious diseases, including COVID-19, and outbreaks of COVID-19 have been reported on cruise ships.

What can travelers do to protect themselves and others?

CDC recommends that travelers avoid cruise travel worldwide. For most travelers, cruise ship travel is voluntary and should be rescheduled for a future date. If you do go on a cruise during the COVID-19 pandemic:

Do not board a cruise if you are sick, if you know you have COVID-19, or if you were exposed to a person with COVID-19 in the past 14 days.
Discuss cruise ship travel with your healthcare provider. Older adults and people of any age with underlying medical conditions are at increased risk of severe illness if infected with the virus that causes COVID-19.
Stay at least 6 feet/2 meters (about 2 arm lengths) from anyone who is not traveling with you. It’s important to do this everywhere—both indoors and outdoors.
Wear a mask to keep your nose and mouth covered when you are in shared spaces, including when using public transportation.
Wash your hands often or use hand sanitizer (with at least 60% alcohol).
Avoid contact with anyone who is sick.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, and mouth.
Do not travel if you are sick.
If you get sick with symptoms of COVID-19, stay in your cabin and notify the onboard medical center immediately.
Passengers who decide to travel are advised to take the following precautions to protect others for 14 days after their return from a cruise ship or river cruise voyage:

Get tested 3–5 days after your trip AND stay home for 7 days after travel.
Even if you test negative, stay home for the full 7 days.
If your test is positive, isolate yourself to protect others from getting infected.
If you don't get tested, it's safest to stay home for 10 days after travel.
Avoid being around people who are at increased risk for severe illness for 14 days, whether you get tested or not.
Always follow state and local recommendations or requirements related to travel

***CDC’s role in helping cruise ship travelers during the COVID-19 pandemic

Outbreaks of infectious diseases can happen on cruise ships because people spend time close together and with travelers from many countries. The current scientific evidence suggests that cruise ships pose a greater risk of COVID-19 transmission than other settings because of the high population density onboard ships, which are typically more densely populated than cities or most other living situations. While this is one contributing factor, CDC’s surveillance data show that drastically decreasing population onboard without additional mitigation measures does not end transmission.

Other factors likely contributing to onboard transmission are crew living and working in close quarters in a partially enclosed environment where social distancing may prove challenging, even with a limited number of people. Additionally, mild illnesses and asymptomatic infections make case detection and isolation and quarantine practices based on clinical presentation alone challenging. Thus, unrecognized spread of infection among crew may keep the virus circulating from one voyage to the next. Disease can spread between ships when crew members from a ship with an outbreak transfer to other ships. Infected people may also travel on cruise ships between countries.

CDC had a No Sail Order in place from March 14 to October 29, 2020 that suspended cruise ship passenger operations in the United States. From July 20 through September 21, 2020, CDC invited public comments  on specific questions regarding interventions, methods, protocols, and procedures for protecting the public’s health as well as the health of prospective passengers, crew members, and industry-related service providers. The majority of respondents (approximately 75%) expressed support for resuming passenger operations in a way that mitigates the risk of spreading COVID-19. Most respondents also expressed the need for increased public health measures and accommodations for travelers, including health screening, testing, mask use, social distancing, travel insurance, and refunds.

As of October 30, 2020, CDC will take a phased approach to resuming passenger operations. The initial phases will consist of testing and additional safeguards for crew members. CDC will ensure cruise ship operators have adequate health and safety protections for crew members while they build the onboard laboratory capacity needed to test crew and future passengers. Subsequent phases include simulated (mock) voyages with volunteers playing the role of passengers to test cruise ship operators’ ability to mitigate COVID-19 risk, certification for ships that meet specific requirements, and return to passenger voyages in a manner that mitigates COVID-19 risk among passengers, crew members, and communities. The phases are subject to change based on public health considerations and cruise ship operators’ ability to mitigate COVID-19 risk.

CDC’s Framework for Conditional Sailing Order replaces CDC’s No Sail Order. This Order introduces a phased approach for the resumption of passenger cruises. It also provides a basis for the issuance of additional technical instructions and orders. This Order describes requirements for testing crew and developing onboard testing capacity. Future orders will address additional activities to help cruise lines prepare for and return to passenger operations in a way that mitigates the risk of spreading COVID-19.

What is the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order?
The Framework for Conditional Sailing Order, effective October 30, 2020, describes the phases of resuming passenger operations on cruise ships in a way that mitigates the risk of spreading COVID-19. During the initial phases as described in this Order, cruise ship operators must demonstrate adherence to testing, quarantine and isolation, and social distancing requirements to protect crew members, before passenger travel will be allowed to resume in later phases. Cruise ship operators must also build the onboard laboratory capacity needed to test crew and future passengers.

Passenger operations continue to be suspended during the initial phases of this Order. Cruise ship operators must continue to follow the COVID-19 response plans they developed under CDC’s No Sail Order and the COVID-19 Color Coding System requiring preventive measures for crew on board based on the ship’s status. Cruise ship operators must also follow CDC’s Technical Instructions.

How long is the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order in effect?
The Order is effective upon signature and shall remain in effect until the earliest of

the expiration of the Secretary of Health and Human Services’ declaration that COVID-19 constitutes a public health emergency;
the CDC Director rescinds or modifies the order based on specific public health or other considerations; or
November 1, 2021.
Why did CDC establish the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order?
CDC established the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order to protect the public, cruise ship passengers, cruise ship crews, other industry workers, and federal partners (i.e., Customs and Border Protection and the U.S. Coast Guard). Given the continued spread of COVID-19 worldwide and increased risk of COVID-19 on cruise ships, a careful approach is needed to resume passenger operations. During the initial phases of this Order, cruise ship operators must take adequate safeguards for crew, as demonstrated through laboratory testing for COVID-19 and other measures, to prevent, mitigate, and respond to the risk of COVID-19 onboard cruise ships.

Which cruise ships does the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order cover?
The Framework for Conditional Sailing Order applies to all cruise ships, which the Order defines as commercial passenger ships with the capacity to carry more than 250 people and where an overnight stay onboard by passengers or crew is anticipated. This Order applies to all cruise ships operating in U.S. waters as well as cruise ships operating outside of U.S. waters if the cruise ship operator intends for the ship to return to U.S. waters while the Order remains in effect. This Order does not apply to non-cruise ships such as cargo ships.

What does the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order mean for my upcoming trip?
Passengers who plan to travel by cruise ship should contact their cruise line companies directly for further information concerning their itineraries.

CDC has issued a Level 4 Travel Health Notice with a clear recommendation to avoid all cruise travel due to ongoing spread of COVID-19 and the increased risk of person-to-person spread of infectious diseases on cruise ships.

What was the No Sail Order?
On March 14, 2020, CDC issued a No Sail Order and Suspension of Further Embarkation for cruise ships in waters subject to U.S. jurisdiction; the No Sail Order was extended on April 9, 2020, July 16, 2020, and September 30, 2020. During the No Sail Order period, cruise ship operators were required to suspend passenger operations and not embark passengers. The No Sail Order required that cruise ship operators develop plans to prevent, mitigate, and respond to the spread of COVID-19 onboard cruise ships to protect crew. CDC’s Framework for Conditional Sailing Order, effective October 30, 2020, replaces the No Sail Order.

What is CDC doing to help cruise ships with crew still onboard?
CDC is committed to helping cruise lines provide for the safety and well-being of their crew members while onboard and as they disembark.

The process for crew disembarkation required during the No Sail Order period remains the same during the initial phases of the Framework for Conditional Sailing Order.

***Ship Crew Well-Being During COVID-19

Be Informed
As a ship crew member, you are at increased risk for exposure to COVID-19. Like many other viruses, the virus that causes COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) appears to spread easily between people in close quarters aboard ships and boats. You can take steps to protect yourself and others from COVID-19. Learn more about healthy ways to cope with stress and staying connected during COVID-19.

As a ship crew member, how can I protect myself and others?
Commercial shipping, including cruise ships and other passenger vessels, involves the movement of large numbers of people in closed and semi-closed settings. Like other close-contact environments, ships may increase transmission of respiratory viruses from person to person through exposure to respiratory droplets or contact with contaminated surfaces.

Take these steps to reduce risk to yourself and others:

Avoid close contact by staying at least 6 feet (2 meters or two arm lengths) away from others when working or moving through the ship.
Wear a mask to keep your nose and mouth covered when outside your cabin and in public settings. Wearing masks is important to slow the spread of COVID-19.
Avoid close contact with anyone who is sick.
Avoid touching your eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands.
Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Proper hand hygiene is an important measure to protect yourself and prevent spread of disease.
Key times to clean hands in general include:
Before, during, and after preparing food
Before and after eating food
After using the toilet
After blowing your nose, coughing, or sneezing
Before and after touching your mask
Before and after caring for someone sick
Additional times to clean hands on the job include:
Before and after work shifts
Before and after work breaks
Before and after handling frequently touched items, such as food service carts
After handling food waste and non-disposable food service items
After touching dirty surfaces like floors, walls, and soiled carriers and equipment
After handling another person’s used linens
Participate in daily temperature checks onboard, if required, and watch your health for symptoms of COVID-19.
Testing for COVID-19 is an important way to protect yourself and your fellow crew. See COVID-19 Testing: Information for Crew on Shipsand COVID-19 Testing: What You Need to Know
If you feel sick, stay in your cabin and tell your ship’s medical staff, your supervisor, or your captain, so that the proper precautions can be taken for you and other crew members on board.
Follow isolation and quarantine protocols when advised to do so by medical staff. Learn about your vessel’s protocols in case you or someone else on board become ill.
Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces daily (tables, doorknobs, light switches, countertops, handles, desks, phones, keyboards, toilets, faucets, and sinks). Follow the directions on the cleaning product’s label.
Wear personal protective equipment (PPE), when required, to perform certain job tasks. Contact your supervisor, captain, or your ship’s medical staff for more information on PPE.
Use gloves when:
Handling dining items such as cups, utensils, and serving trays used by another person
Handling linens used by another person
Cleaning potentially contaminated surfaces
Handling garbage
Wash your hands after removing gloves.
Take care of your emotional and mental health and make proper sleep a priority.

How can I take care of my mental health?
This COVID-19 pandemic may be stressful for crew. Fear and anxiety about this disease and what could happen can be overwhelming. Public health actions, such as keeping distance from others, can make crew feel isolated and lonely and can increase stress and anxiety, even though these actions are necessary to reduce the spread of COVID-19. Learn more about stress on board a ship during COVID-19

You can do several things to look after your physical and mental health, which will help you to be healthier and more resilient during this difficult time.

***For Parents: Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) associated with COVID-19

What we know about MIS-C
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs. We do not yet know what causes MIS-C. However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19. MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care.
What to do if you think your child is sick with MIS-C
Contact your child’s doctor, nurse, or clinic right away if your child is showing symptoms of MIS-C:

Fever
Abdominal pain
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Neck pain
Rash
Bloodshot eyes
Feeling extra tired
Be aware that not all children will have all the same symptoms.

Seek emergency care right away if your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs of MIS-C or other concerning signs:

Trouble breathing
Pain or pressure in the chest that does not go away
New confusion
Inability to wake or stay awake
Pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin
Severe abdominal pain
How doctors will care for your child
Doctors may do certain tests to look for inflammation or other signs of disease. These tests might include:

Blood tests
Chest x-ray
Heart ultrasound (echocardiogram)
Abdominal ultrasound
Doctors may provide supportive care for symptoms (medicine and/or fluids to make your child feel better) and may use various medicines to treat inflammation. Most children who become ill with MIS-C will need to be treated in the hospital. Some will need to be treated in the pediatric intensive care unit (ICU).

Parents or caregivers who have concerns about their child’s health, including concerns about COVID-19  or MIS-C,  should call a pediatrician or other healthcare provider immediately. Healthcare providers can follow CDC recommendations to keep children and their parents or caregivers safe if an in-person visit is needed.

What we don’t know about MIS-C
CDC is still learning about MIS-C and how it affects children, so we don’t know why some children have gotten sick with MIS-C and others have not. We also do not know if children with certain health conditions are more likely to get MIS-C. These are among the many questions CDC is working to try to understand.

All CDC recommendations are based on the best data and science available at the time, and we will update them as we learn more.

***COVID-19 in Children and Teens

What you need to know
Children & teens can get COVID-19.
While fewer children have been sick with COVID-19 compared to adults, children can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, can get sick from COVID-19, and can spread the virus that causes COVID-19 to others. Children, like adults, who have COVID-19 but have no symptoms (“asymptomatic”) can still spread the virus to others.

Most children with COVID-19 have mild symptoms or have no symptoms at all. However, some children can get severely ill from COVID-19. They might require hospitalization, intensive care, or a ventilator to help them breathe. In rare cases, they might die.

CDC and partners are investigating a rare but serious medical condition associated with COVID-19 in children called Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C). We do not yet know what causes MIS-C and who is at increased risk for developing it. Learn more about MIS-C.

Babies under 1 year old and children with certain underlying conditions may be more likely to have severe illness from COVID-19.
Babies under 1 year old might be more likely to have severe illness from COVID-19. Other children, regardless of age, with the following underlying medical conditions might also be at increased risk of severe illness compared to other children:

Asthma or chronic lung disease
Diabetes
Genetic, neurologic, or metabolic conditions
Sickle cell disease
Heart disease since birth
Immunosuppression (weakened immune system due to certain medical conditions or being on medications that weaken the immune system)
Medical complexity (children with multiple chronic conditions that affect many parts of the body, or are dependent on technology and other significant supports for daily life)
Obesity
This list does not include every underlying condition that might increase the risk for severe illness in children. As more information becomes available, CDC will continue to update and share information about risk for severe illness among children.

If your child has an underlying condition, make sure to discuss your child’s potential for getting very sick with their healthcare provider. Symptoms of COVID-19 are similar in adults and children and can look like symptoms of other common illnesses such as colds, strep throat, or allergies. The most common symptoms of COVID-19 in children are fever and cough, but children may have any of these signs or symptoms of COVID-19:

Fever or chills
Cough
Nasal congestion or runny nose
New loss of taste or smell
Sore throat
Shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
Diarrhea
Nausea or vomiting
Stomachache
Tiredness
Headache
Muscle or body aches
Poor appetite or poor feeding, especially in babies under 1 year old
What you can do
Monitor your child for COVID-19 symptoms.
Pay particular attention to:

Fever (temperature 100.4 °F or higher)
Sore throat
New uncontrolled cough that causes difficulty breathing (for a child with chronic allergic/asthmatic cough, see if there is a change from their usual cough)
Diarrhea, vomiting, or stomachache
New onset of severe headache, especially with a fever
Keep track of who your child comes into close contact with
If your child or you were around someone who has COVID-19, someone from the health department may contact you for contact tracing. Speak with them and follow their advice.

Take steps to protect your child if you are sick and slow the spread of COVID-19.

To learn more about how to protect yourself from the virus that causes COVID-19 visit the How to Protect Yourself and Others page.

Keep your child home and call their healthcare provider if your child gets sick
If your child has symptoms and may have been exposed to the virus that causes COVID-19 or has been in an area where the virus is spreading,

Keep your child home
Call your child’s healthcare provider to discuss whether your child needs to be evaluated or tested for COVID-19. If you suspect that your child or someone they know has COVID-19 or has come into close contact with someone who has COVID-19, visit Coronavirus self-checker. This online tool will help you decide when to seek testing or medical care for your child.
Protect yourself from COVID-19 while caring for your child
Notify your child’s school that your child is sick. Also inform the school if your child has had a COVID-19 test and what the result is, if available.
Review your child’s school (or other childcare facility) policies related to when a child who has been sick can return
Bring your child back to school or other in-person activities only after they can safely be around others
If your child is sick but a healthcare provider tells you that your child does not have COVID-19, your child may still need to stay home. Discuss this with your child’s healthcare provider and review your child’s school or childcare facility’s policies to know when your child can return to school or other in-person activities.

In a medical emergency, call 911 or bring your child to the emergency department.
Do not delay seeking emergency care for your child because you are worried about the spread of COVID-19. Emergency departments have infection prevention plans to protect you and your child from getting sick with COVID-19 if your child needs emergency care.

If your child is showing any of these emergency warning signs, seek emergency medical care immediately.

Trouble breathing
Pain or pressure in the chest that doesn’t go away
New confusion
Can’t wake up or stay awake when not tired
Pale, gray, or blue-colored skin, lips, or nail beds, depending on skin tone
This list does not include all possible symptoms.

Call your child’s healthcare provider for any other symptoms that are severe or concerning to you.

***Help Stop the Spread of COVID-19 in Children

Wash hands

Make sure your child washes their hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds. Read more and watch a video on how to wash hands correctly.

If soap and water are not readily available, make sure your child uses a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Teach your child to cover all surfaces of their hands with hand sanitizer and rub their hands together until they feel dry. If your child is under 6 years of age, supervise them when they use hand sanitizer.

You, as a parent, guardian, or caretaker, play an important role in teaching your child to wash their hands.

Explain that handwashing can keep them healthy and stop germs from spreading to others.
Be a good role model — if you wash your hands as recommended, they’re more likely to do the same.
Make handwashing a family activity.
Practice cough and sneeze etiquette by covering your nose and mouth with a tissue when sneezing or coughing, throwing the tissue in the closest garbage can, and washing your hands after you throw it away.

Avoid close contact

Keep your child at least 6 feet away from others who don’t live with them and those who are sick (such as coughing and sneezing).

Limit in-person playtime and connect virtually with other children

CDC recognizes this pandemic has been stressful to many. Socializing and interacting with peers can be a healthy way for children to cope with stress and connect with others. However, the key to slowing the spread of COVID-19 is to limit close contact with others as much as possible.

An important guiding principle to remember is that the more people your child interacts with, and the longer that interaction, the higher the risk of COVID-19 spread. While your child may be spending time with other people as they return to childcare or school settings, you should limit your child’s interactions with additional children and adults outside of childcare or school to decrease risk.

For playdates, the risk of COVID-19 increases as follows:

Lowest risk: No in-person playdates. Children connect virtually (via phone calls and video chats).
Medium risk: Infrequent playdates with the same family or friend who is also practicing everyday preventive measures. Children maintain a distance of at least 6 feet from each other during the playdate. ​Playdates are held outdoors. (Indoor spaces are more risky than outdoor space where there is less ventilation and it might be harder to keep children apart.)
Highest Risk: Frequent indoor playdates with multiple friends or families who are not practicing everyday preventive measures. Children do not maintain a distance of 6 feet from each other.
To help your child maintain social connections while social distancing, help them have supervised phone calls or video chats with their friends.

Limit your child’s interaction with people at highest risk of severe illness from COVID-19

To protect those who are at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19, you may consider taking these extra precautions.

Separate your child from others in your household who have an increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19.
Carefully consider who might be best to provide childcare if you are unable to care for your child (for example, you are not able to stay with your child while childcare or school is closed).
Limit your child’s contact with other people if someone at higher risk for COVID-19 will be providing care (such as an older adult or someone with an underlying medical condition).
Postpone visits or trips to see grandparents, older family members and family members who are at increased risk for severe illness from COVID-19. Consider connecting virtually or by writing letters.
Wear a mask

Children 2 years of age and older should wear a mask.

Help your child (if 2 years of age or older) wear a mask correctly when in public and when around people they don’t live with.

CDC recognizes that wearing masks may not be possible in every situation or for some people. Correct and consistent use of masks may be challenging for some children, such as children with certain disabilities, including cognitive, intellectual, developmental, sensory and behavioral disorders. Learn more about what you can do if your child or you cannot wear masks in certain situations.

Note that wearing a mask is not a substitute for other everyday prevention actions, like avoiding close contact with others and washing hands frequently.

Clean & disinfect

Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces daily

Frequently touched surfaces include tables, doorknobs, light switches, remotes, handles, desks, toilets, and sinks.

Clean with detergent or soap and water.
Then disinfect with EPA-registered household disinfectant
Wash items, including washable plush toys as needed

Follow the manufacturer’s instructions.
Use the warmest appropriate water setting and dry items completely.
You can wash dirty laundry from a sick person together with other people’s items.
Consider changing travel plans

Because travel increases your child’s chances of coming in contact with others who may have COVID-19 and your child spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to others if they are infected, staying home is the best way to protect your child and others from getting sick.

We don’t know if one type of travel is safer than others. Any place where travelers interact with other people (for example, airports, bus stations, train stations, gas stations, restaurants, and rest stops) are places travelers can be exposed to the virus in the air and on surfaces. It can also be hard to stay at least 6 feet apart from other people during travel. Learn more about Travel During COVID-19.

***Keep Children Healthy during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Wash hands

Wash your hands with soap and water for 20 seconds, and encourage your child to do the same. Read more and watch a video on how to wash hands correctly.

If soap and water are not available, use hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Teach your child to cover all surfaces of their hands with hand sanitizer and rub their hands together until they feel dry. If your child is under 6 years of age, supervise them when they use hand sanitizer.

Wear a mask

Make sure everyone in your household wears a mask (if 2 years of age or older) when in public and when around people who don’t live in your household. Ensure your child wears their masks correctly and safely.

Some children may find it challenging to wear a mask. If your child finds it challenging, you can consider alternatives.

Avoid close contact

Make sure your child and everyone else in your household keep at least 6 feet away from other people who don’t live with them and people who are sick (such as coughing and sneezing).

Cover coughs and sneezes

When coughing or sneezing, cover your mouth and nose with a tissue, throw your tissue in closest garbage can, and wash your hands. Encourage your child and all household members to do the same.

Bring your child for their healthcare visits
Routine well-child visits and vaccine visits are essential, even during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Prepare for your child’s healthcare visits

Call your child’s healthcare provider to ask about any upcoming appointments or to ask when your child’s vaccinations are due.
Ask your child’s healthcare provider what steps they are taking to separate healthy patients from those who may be sick. Some healthcare providers may choose to delay in-person visits, which will be based on the situation in your community and your child’s individual care plan.
Notify your child’s healthcare provider before your visit if you or your child have any symptoms of COVID-19.
Bring your child for well-child visits and vaccine visits

Your child’s healthcare provider will check your child’s growth and development at well-child visits. You can also track your child’s developmental milestones with CDC’s free Milestone Tracker app.

Vaccines are an important part of keeping your child healthy by protecting them against vaccine-preventable diseases. There are effective vaccines for illnesses such as measles, flu (influenza), whooping cough (pertussis), and other diseases that can spread from person to person. Although there is not yet a vaccine to help protect against COVID-19, your child should receive all of their recommended vaccines.

Get a flu vaccine by the end of October

A flu vaccine is the single best way to prevent flu.

CDC recommends that everyone 6 months of age and older get a flu vaccine each year by the end of October (with rare exceptions). You and your child can get a flu vaccine during healthcare visits, or you can find additional locations at vaccinefinder.org .

Getting a flu vaccine can reduce the likelihood of your child getting sick, being hospitalized, or dying from flu. You and your family getting a flu vaccine will also help protect others around you who may be more vulnerable to severe illness from flu, like babies and young children, older adults, pregnant people, and those with certain medical conditions.

It is especially important for this upcoming flu season to help prevent over-burdening the healthcare system during the COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 and flu are both infectious illnesses that can affect breathing and have similar symptoms, but they are caused by different viruses. Learn more about similarities and differences between flu and COVID-19.

More about flu:

Know the emergency warning signs of flu and seek medical care immediately if your child has any of these symptoms
Children & Flu
Flu Information for Parents
Frequently Asked Questions on Flu for the 2020-2021 Season
Help your child stay active
Regular physical activity can improve your child’s physical and mental health.

Ensure your child stays active every day while taking everyday preventive actions. Learn more about how much physical activity your child should get daily.
Find ways to make physical activity a part of your child’s life.
Set a positive example by leading an active lifestyle yourself and making physical activity a part of your family’s daily routine.
Help your child stay socially connected
Reach out to friends and family via phone or video chats.
Write cards or letters to family members who they may not be able to visit.
Check to see if your child’s school has tips and guidelines to help support social and emotional needs of your child. Some schools and non-profits, such as the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning and The Yale Center for Emotional Intelligence, have resources for social and emotional learning.
Help your child cope with stress
The COVID-19 pandemic can be stressful for both adults and children. Learn more about signs of stress in children, ways to support your child, and how to take care of your own mental health.

CDC has also developed several tools to help you care for your child’s mental health and well-being. COVID-19 Parental Resource Kit offers tools to help you understand your child’s social, emotional, and mental health challenges according to their age group and promote their well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Essentials for Parenting Toddlers and preschoolers page provides guidance on how to address common parenting challenges, like tantrums and whining, and information on things you can do to build a positive, healthy relationship with your young children.

Ask about school meal services
Check with your child’s school on plans to continue meal services if school is closed to in-person learning for some or all students. Many schools may continue to provide meals in different ways, such as allowing families to pick up meals at the school or providing grab-and-go meals at other locations.

***Help Children Learn at Home
There are many ways you can help children learn at home. Whether your child is attending in-person classes, online classes at home, or a combination of both, adjusting to a new learning routine can be challenging and stressful for everyone involved. The following strategies are meant to help you get the support you need to facilitate at-home learning while staying connected and engaged with your school community. Remember – there is no “right” way for your child to learn at home. Do what works for you and your family, and make sure to prioritize your own well-being so that you stay healthy and feel ready to address your child’s needs in education and beyond.

Stay in touch with your child’s school
Whether your child is learning from home full time or part of the time, communicate challenges to your school. If you face technology or connectivity issues, need additional resources to support at-home learning, do not have anyone to supervise your child while they take virtual classes, or if your child is having a hard time completing assignments, let the school know. Good questions to ask are below:
Ask whether there are out-of-school time programs that are continuing to operate, some of which might also be open during the school day.
If coordinating with other families is of interest to you, ask whether the school is supporting families who wish to form cohorts or “pods.”
Ask whether the school can recommend any school or community programs that assist with small group in-person learning.
Talk to your child’s teacher regularly about academic progress and any issues they are having. Consider ideas about how to better support your child.
If your child is older (in middle or high school), you may consider encouraging them to communicate directly with their teachers about progress, challenges, and learning needs.
Ask about available school services
Check with your school on plans to continue meal services during school closures or virtual instruction. Many schools are keeping school facilities open to allow families to pick up meals or are providing grab-and-go meals at a central location. If you or your household need help in obtaining nutritious food options, find additional resources at USDA Nutrition Assistance Program , or call the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) National Hunger Hotline at 1-866-3-HUNGRY or 1-877-8-HAMBRE to speak with a representative about finding food resources such as meal sites, food banks, and other social services available near you.
If you have a child who receives special education services, accommodations or services in school through their 504 plan or individualized education program (IEP), these should be continued, as much as possible, while learning at home. Check in with your school about options to access these interventions. Many schools are continuing interventions like speech therapy, small group classes, extended time, and more. You may also consult your state’s special education agency webpage  for additional resources and information. For additional information about continuing services, please see https://www.ed.gov/coronavirus/program-information#speced .
Changes related to COVID-19 may cause your child to experience stress and anxiety. For support, ask your school how to connect your child to additional school support staff such as the school counselor, academic advisor, psychologist, or social worker. Learn more about helping children cope with emergencies.
Create a schedule and routine for learning at home
Where possible, set up a designated, quiet space in your home for on-line learning. Try to have your child choose a space where they agree to learn.
If not currently in place, develop a good line of communication with your student, allowing them to share openly with you how they’re feeling to maximize educational attainment.
Limit distractions from siblings, television shows, tablets, or other devices that may take your child’s attention away from learning. Set up rules for everyone at home to try to be as quiet as possible while your child is engaged in class.
Review assignments and expectations from the school, and help your child establish a reasonable pace for completing their schoolwork. You may need to assist your child with turning on devices, reading instructions, and typing answers. If you encounter difficulties in using technology needed for online learning, contact your child’s teacher for assistance.
Develop consistent routines and expectations that work for your child and reinforce them through reminders (e.g., written schedule, pictures), positive feedback, or rewards.
Have consistent bedtimes and have your child wake up at the same time on learning days.
Insert breaks in the schedule for fun activities, free time, healthy meals and snacks, time outdoors and physical activity. Provide opportunities for time away from screens. If your schedule allows, take breaks with your child to connect and hear about how the day is going.
Consider ways your child can stay connected with their friends and other family members without spending time in person (e.g., video chats, FaceTime, drive-by visits).
Plan for flexibility in the schedule—it’s okay to adapt based on your day! Consider designating an amount of time each week that allows for more flexibility in your child’s learning schedule.
Consider your child’s individual learning needs
The transition to being at home will be different for preschoolers, elementary students, middle school students, and high school students. Ask your child what they like and find challenging about learning at home, then make adjustments, as needed.
If your child has special or intensive support needs, consider increasing the structure and consistency of the learning routine. Increase the frequency of reminders about expectations and share positive feedback or other rewards when they are met. Consider spending time at the end of each day of at-home learning to talk with your child about the progress they made toward their goals that day.
For younger children or children who have trouble focusing, allow for more frequent breaks and use a timer to indicate the end of a break. You may also consider providing breaks as rewards for completing more challenging activities.
For younger children or children with sensory needs, sitting at a table all day may prove challenging. Consider alternatives such as floor space, floor pillows, or a yoga ball.
For children with an individualized education program (IEP), collaborate with your child’s special education team to develop a virtual learning plan and specific learning, social, emotional, or behavioral goals. Work together to brainstorm strategies that will support your child’s progress toward goals (e.g., visual goal charts and schedules, visual or audible activity timers, verbal positive reinforcement, a comfortable learning environment), and commit to check-in regularly about progress.
For English learners, collaborate with your school to ensure continuity of your child’s language instruction educational program and language accommodations, as appropriate. See the National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition resources related to continuity of learning.
Consider additional options for learning
If you’re looking for additional at-home learning options beyond regular schoolwork, collaborate with your child’s teacher or other families to brainstorm creative learning opportunities that meet the needs and interests of children in different age groups in your household while keeping everyone safe from COVID-19 (e.g., virtual fieldtrips, virtual college visits, at-home activity ideas).
Consider hands-on activities, like puzzles, painting, drawing, and making things to supplement online learning activities and reduce screen time.
Independent play can also be used in place of structured learning or used as a reward when your child completes a challenging structured learning activity or task.
Practice handwriting and grammar by writing letters to friends and family members. This is a great way to help your child feel connected to others without face-to-face contact.
Consider starting a journal with your child to document this time and discuss the shared experiences, challenges, and memories.
See if your local library is hosting virtual or live-streamed reading events, and encourage your child to explore available audiobooks or e-books that they can read for fun.

***COVID-19 And Animals
What you need to know
We do not know the exact source of the current outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), but we know that it originally came from an animal, likely a bat.
At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, to people.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
More studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by COVID-19.
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations.
People with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should avoid contact with animals, including pets, livestock, and wildlife.

Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses. Some coronaviruses cause cold-like illnesses in people, while others cause illness in certain types of animals, such as cattle, camels, and bats. Some coronaviruses, such as canine and feline coronaviruses, infect only animals and do not infect people.

Risk of animals spreading SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, to people
Some coronaviruses that infect animals can be spread to people and then spread between people, but this is rare. This is what happened with SARS-CoV-2, which likely originated in bats. The first reported infections were linked to a live animal market, but the virus is now spreading from person to person.

SARS-CoV-2 spreads mainly from person to person through respiratory droplets from coughing, sneezing, and talking. At this time, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in spreading the virus that causes COVID-19. Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low. More studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by COVID-19.

Risk of people spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to animals
We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations, especially after close contact with a person with COVID-19.

For information on how to protect pets from possible infection with SARS-CoV-2, see If You Have Pets.

Animals that can be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19
We know that cats, dogs, and some other mammals can be infected with SARS-CoV-2, but we don’t yet know all of the animals that can get infected. There have been reports of animals being infected with the virus worldwide.

A small number of pet cats and dogs have been reported to be infected with SARS-CoV-2 in several countries, including the United States. One ferret was reported positive for SARS-CoV-2 in Slovenia. Most of these pets became sick after contact with people with COVID-19.
Several animals in zoological facilities have tested positive for SARS-CoV-2, including large cats and great apes. Several lions and tigers  in a New York zoo, a puma in South Africa, tigers   in a Tennessee zoo, snow leopards  at a Kentucky zoo, and gorillas  at a California zoo tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 after showing signs of illness. A cougar and tiger  at a Texas facility that exhibits wild animals also tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. It is suspected that these animals became sick after being exposed to employees with COVID-19, despite the staff following COVID-19 precautions.
Mink and SARS-CoV-2
SARS-CoV-2 has been reported in mink on farms in multiple countries , including the United States.
In the United States, respiratory disease and increases in mink deaths have been seen on most affected mink farms. However, mink that appear healthy have also been confirmed to have SARS-CoV-2 infection in several countries.
Infected workers likely introduced SARS-CoV-2 to mink on the farms, and the virus then began to spread among the mink. Once the virus is introduced on a farm, spread can occur between mink as well as from mink to other animals on the farm (dogs, cats).
Currently, there is no evidence that animals play a significant role in the spread of SARS-CoV-2 to people. However, reports from infected mink farms in the Netherlands and Denmark suggest that in these environments there is the possibility for spread of SARS-CoV-2 from mink to people.
Although for most people in the United States the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection from animals is low, there is a higher risk for people working on mink farms.
Worker safety is critical to protect people and animals on mink farms. Mink farm workers with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 should avoid contact with animals, including mink, and should follow available guidance for farmed mink and other mustelids to avoid introducing SARS-CoV-2 to mink on farms.
Guidance developed collaboratively by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), CDC, and state animal and public health partners using a One Health approach is available to protect worker and animal health:
Prevent Introduction of SARS-CoV-2 on Mink Farms: Interim SARS-CoV-2 Guidance and Recommendations for Farmed Mink and Other Mustelids
Response and Containment Guidelines: Interim Guidance for Animal Health and Public Health Officials Managing Farmed Mink and other Farmed Mustelids with SARS-CoV-2
CDC deployed One Health teams to multiple states to support state and local departments of health and agriculture, federal partners, and others in conducting on-farm investigations into people and multiple animal species with SARS-CoV-2 infection. As part of these investigations, the teams collected samples from animals on the farms and from people working on mink farms and in surrounding communities. CDC and USDA are collaborating to test and analyze these samples to better understand how SARS-CoV-2 can spread among mink, other animals, and people, as well as genetic variations of the virus. These investigations are ongoing and more information will be shared as it becomes available.
CDC is aware of reports of a new strain of SARS-CoV-2 virus in mink in Denmark that is also present in the local human population. Based on reports from Denmark, it appears that mink became infected after exposure to people infected with the virus, and the virus then mutated and spread from mink back to humans. This new strain, called “Cluster 5,” has not been seen before and is made up of five mutations.
Of mink and human samples tested so far in the United States, none have contained all the mutations that make up the Cluster 5 strain.
Currently in the United States, there is no evidence of SARS-CoV-2 spreading from mink to people, but investigations are ongoing. More information will be shared when it becomes available.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) maintains a list of all animals and mink farms in the United States with SARS-CoV-2 infections confirmed by their National Veterinary Services Laboratories.
Research on animals and COVID-19
Many studies have been done to learn more about how this virus can affect different animals.

Recent experimental research shows that cats, dogs, ferrets, fruit bats, hamsters, and tree shrews can become infected with the virus. Cats, ferrets, fruit bats, and hamsters can also spread the infection to other animals of the same species in laboratory settings.
Data from studies suggest that dogs can get infected but might not spread the virus to other dogs as easily as cats and ferrets can spread the virus to other animals of the same species.
A number of studies have investigated non-human primates as models for human infection. Rhesus macaques, cynomolgus macaques, grivets, and common marmosets can become infected with SARS-CoV-2 and become sick in a laboratory setting.
Laboratory mice, pigs, chickens, and ducks do not seem to become infected or spread the infection based on results from studies.
These findings were based on a small number of animals, and do not show whether animals can spread infection to people. More studies are needed to understand if and how different animals could be affected by COVID-19.

CDC, USDA, state public health and animal health officials, and academic partners are working in some states to conduct active surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 in pets, including cats, dogs, and other small mammals, that had contact with a person with COVID-19. These animals are being tested for SARS-CoV-2 infection and also tested to see whether the pet develops antibodies to this virus. This work is being done to help us better understand how common SARS-CoV-2 infection might be in pets as well as the possible role of pets in the spread of this virus.

***If You Have Pets

What you need to know
A small number of pets worldwide, including cats and dogs, have been reported to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.
Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low.
It appears that the virus that causes COVID-19 can spread from people to animals in some situations.
Treat pets as you would other human family members – do not let pets interact with people outside the household.
If a person inside the household becomes sick, isolate that person from everyone else, including pets.
This is a rapidly evolving situation and information will be updated as it becomes available.

Coronaviruses are a large family of viruses. Some coronaviruses cause cold-like illnesses in people, while others cause illness in certain types of animals, such as cattle, camels, and bats. Some coronaviruses, such as canine and feline coronaviruses, infect only animals and do not infect humans.

Risk of people spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 to pets
We are still learning about the virus that causes COVID-19, but it appears that it can spread from people to animals in some situations. A small number of pets worldwide, including cats and dogs, have been reported  to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people with COVID-19.

Infected pets might get sick or they might not have any symptoms. Of the pets that have gotten sick, most only had mild illness and fully recovered.

What to do if you have pets
Until we learn more about how this virus affects animals, treat pets as you would other human family members to protect them from a possible infection.

Because there is a risk that people with COVID-19 could spread the virus to animals, CDC recommends that pet owners limit their pet’s interaction with people outside their household.

Keep cats indoors when possible and do not let them roam freely outside.
Pets or other animals should not be allowed to roam freely around the facility, and cats should be kept indoors.
Avoid public places where a large number of people gather.
Do not put a mask on pets. Masks could harm your pet.
There is no evidence that the virus can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of pets. Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners. Talk to your veterinarian​ if you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet​​.

Talk to your veterinarian if your pet gets sick or if you have any concerns about your pet’s health.

Protect pets if you are sick
If you are sick with COVID-19 (either suspected or confirmed by a test), you should restrict contact with your pets and other animals, just like you would with people. Until we know more about this virus, people sick with COVID-19 should avoid contact with pets and other animals.

When possible, have another member of your household care for your pets while you are sick.
Avoid contact with your pet including petting, snuggling, being kissed or licked, sharing food, and sleeping in the same bed.
If you must care for your pet or be around animals while you are sick, wear a mask and wash your hands before and after you interact with them.

If you are sick with COVID-19 and your pet becomes sick, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself. Call your veterinarian and let them know you have been sick with COVID-19. Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets. Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and determine the next steps for your pet’s treatment and care.

For more information visit: What to Do if You are Sick.

Stay healthy around animals
In the United States, there is no evidence that animals are playing a significant role in the spread of COVID-19.  Based on the limited information available to date, the risk of animals spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low. However, because all animals can carry germs that can make people sick, it’s always a good idea to practice healthy habits around pets and other animals.

Wash your hands after handling animals, their food, waste, or supplies.
Practice good pet hygiene and clean up after pets properly.
Talk to your veterinarian if you have questions about your pet’s health.
Be aware that children 5 years of age and younger, people with weakened immune systems, and older adults are more likely to get sick from germs some animals can carry.

***What to Do if Your Pet Tests Positive for the Virus that Causes COVID-19

Print
What you need to know
If your pet tests positive for the virus that causes COVID-19, isolate the pet from everyone else, including other pets.
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners.
Only a few pets have been confirmed to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19. Some pets did not show any signs of illness, but those pets that did get sick all had mild disease that could be taken care of at home. None have died from the infection.
If you think your pet has COVID-19, call a veterinarian first to discuss what you should do.
Pets with confirmed infection with the virus that causes COVID-19 should be restricted to isolation in the home until a veterinarian or public health official has determined that they can be around other pets and people.
We are still learning about how the virus that causes COVID-19 can affect animals.  A small number of pets (cats and dogs) have been confirmed to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with a person with COVID-19. Some pets did not show any signs of illness, but those pets that did get sick all had mild disease that could be taken care of at home. None of the pets have died. Tests for COVID-19 in animals are available for most types of pets, but testing is only recommended for animals with COVID-19 symptoms and that have been exposed to a person with COVID-19.

Based on the limited information available now, the risk of pets spreading COVID-19 to people is considered to be low. There is no reason to abandon or surrender pets that have been confirmed positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.

If you are sick with COVID-19, do not take your pet to the veterinary clinic yourself.  Call your veterinarian first and tell them you are sick with COVID-19. Some veterinarians may offer telemedicine consultations or other plans for seeing sick pets.  Your veterinarian can evaluate your pet and decide the appropriate steps for your pet’s care.
If your pet is tested for COVID-19 and is confirmed to be infected
Depending on how sick your pet is, your veterinarian may recommend that your pet be isolated at home, instead of staying in the hospital.  Some pets did not show any signs of illness, but those pets that did get sick all had mild disease that could be taken care of at home.

If your veterinarian recommends home isolation and you are able to care for your pet at home, follow this advice to protect yourself and others.

What to do if your pet gets sick
Keep your pet at home, except to get medical care
Talk with your veterinarian regularly. Call before you take your pet to the veterinary clinic. Be sure to alert your veterinarian if your pet has trouble breathing, or if you think it is an emergency.
While most pets appear to show only mild symptoms or no symptoms, we are still learning about how they are affected by the virus. Even if your pet appears to be feeling better, avoid the following activities until your veterinarian determines that it is safe for your pet to do so or your pet has met the guidance to end their isolation:
Visits to veterinary hospitals, without calling the veterinarian first
Visits to human healthcare facilities or schools
Visits to parks (including dog parks), markets, or other gatherings such as festivals
Visits to the groomer, including mobile grooming salons
Visits to pet daycares or boarding facilities
Other outings such as playdates, hikes, or visiting other homes, with or without pets
Using dog walkers or pet-sitters that live outside your home
Separate your pet from other people and pets in your home
Have the pet stay in a designated “sick room” (such as a laundry room or extra bathroom) if possible, or otherwise be separated from people and other animals. This is the same way a person with COVID-19 would separate from others in their household.
Avoid contact with the pet as much as possible, including, petting, snuggling, being kissed or licked, and sharing food or bedding.
If possible, provide a separate litterbox or bathroom area from other pets.
DOGS: If you have a private backyard where your dog can go to the bathroom, do not take them for walks. If you must walk your dog, limit it to bathroom breaks only, stay close to your home, and keep your pet at least 6 feet away from other pets and people. Do not let other people touch or interact with your dog.

CATS: Cats should be kept inside. Do not allow cats that have tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19 to roam outside.

CLEANING UP: There is no evidence to suggest that waste from infected pets needs any additional disinfection. Wear gloves when cleaning up after your pet, and place fecal material or litterbox waste in a sealed bag before disposing. Always wash your hands with soap and water immediately after cleaning up after your pet.

Provide bedding, bowls or containers, treats, and toys that are separate from those used by other people or animals in the household.
Disinfect bowls, toys, and other animal care items with an EPA-registered disinfectant  and rinse thoroughly with clean water afterwards.
Soft items like towels, blankets, and other bedding, can be safely laundered and reused. Dirty laundry that has been in contact with an ill animal can be washed with other items.
Monitor your pet’s symptoms
It is important to keep track of your pet’s symptoms during home isolation. If you think your pet has new symptoms or is getting worse, call your veterinarian.

Pets sick with COVID-19 may have:

Fever
Coughing
Difficulty breathing or shortness of breath
Lethargy (unusual laziness or sluggish)
Sneezing
Runny nose
Eye discharge
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Follow all care instructions from your veterinarian.  Your veterinarian may have you keep a written log of your pet’s symptoms.

If your pet develops new symptoms or seems to be getting worse, including trouble breathing, you should call your veterinarian right away.  Your veterinarian may be able to advise you over the phone or may tell you to bring your pet to their clinic or go to another clinic that can better care for your pet.

Protect yourself when caring for a sick pet
Follow similar recommended precautions as for people caring for an infected person at home.
If you are at higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19, another household member should care for the pet, if possible.
People should wear a mask and gloves  in the same room or area as the sick pet.
Animals should not wear a mask. Do not try to put a mask on your pet.
Use gloves when handling the pet’s dishes, toys, or bedding and when picking up feces (poop). Throw out gloves and place waste material or litterbox waste in a sealed bag before throwing away in a trashcan lined with a trash bag. Always wash your hands with soap and water immediately after cleaning up after your pet.
Clean your hands regularly throughout the day.
Wash hands: Wash your hands often with soap and water for at least 20 seconds each  Make sure everyone in the home does the same, especially after touching the sick pet or handling their dishes, toys, or bedding.
Hand sanitizer: If soap and water are not readily available, use a hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.  Cover all surfaces of your hands and rub them together until they feel dry.
Do not touch your eyes, nose, and mouth with unwashed hands.
Clean and then disinfect:
Follow cleaning and disinfecting recommendations found on CDC’s Cleaning and Disinfecting Your Home
Do not wipe or bathe your pet with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners. There is no evidence that viruses, including the virus that causes COVID-19, can spread to people or other animals from the skin, fur, or hair of pets. Using chemical disinfectants on your pet could make them very sick or kill them. Talk to your veterinarian​ if you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your pet.
When it is safe for your pet to be around others: ending home isolation
Follow your veterinarian’s advice for when it is safe for your pet to be around other people and animals. Some pets may need follow-up testing to see if they are still positive for the virus that causes COVID-19. Monitoring, isolation, and movement restrictions can end for positive pets if:

The animal has not shown clinical signs consistent with SARS-CoV-2 infection for at least 72 hours without medical management;
AND one of the following conditions:

It has been at least 14 days since their last positive test from a lab that uses a validated SARS-CoV-2 RT-PCR diagnostic assay;
OR

All sample types collected at follow-up are negative by a validated SARS-CoV-2 RT PCR diagnostic assay.

***Guidance to Reduce the Risk of SARS-CoV-2 Spreading between People and Wildlife

These recommendations may make it less likely for SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, to spread between people and wildlife to protect human health, animal health, and minimize adverse public health and conservation outcomes. Currently, there is no evidence to suggest that SARS-CoV-2 is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.

We are still learning about this virus, but it appears that it can spread from people to susceptible animal species in some situations, especially after close contact with a person with COVID-19. For this reason, the virus may threaten the health and welfare of wildlife and could negatively impact conservation efforts. Anyone who comes into close proximity or contact with wildlife is encouraged to consider the information below to minimize the spread of SARS-CoV-2 between people and wildlife. ​

Considerations for Members of the Public
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is circulating in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people in the United States.

If wildlife were to become infected with the virus, we don’t know whether the infection could then spread among wildlife or if it could spread to other animals, including pets. Further studies are needed to understand if and how different animals, including wildlife, could be affected by COVID-19. Because wildlife can carry other diseases, even without looking sick, it is always important to enjoy wildlife from a distance.

To prevent getting sick from wildlife in the United States:

Keep your family, including pets, a safe distance away from wildlife.
Do not feed wildlife or touch wildlife droppings.
Always wash your hands and supervise children washing their hands after working or playing outside.
Leave orphaned animals alone. Often, the parents are close by and will return for their young.
Consult your state wildlife agency’s guidance if you are preparing or consuming legally harvested game meat.
Do not approach or touch a sick or dead animal – contact your state wildlife agency

Considerations for Hunters
Currently, there is no evidence to suggest SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is spreading in free-living wildlife in the United States, or that wildlife might be a source of infection for people. However, some wild animals are known to be susceptible to infection, and some non-native wildlife, including big cats and non-human primates, have become infected in captive settings such as zoos (see COVID-19 and Animals for more information).

There is no evidence that you can get COVID-19 by preparing or eating food, including wild hunted game meat in the United States. However, hunters can get infected with many diseases when processing or eating game. Hunters should always practice good hygiene when processing animals by following these food safety recommendations:

Do not allow contact between wildlife and domestic animals, including pets and hunting dogs.
Do not harvest animals that appear sick or are found dead.
Keep game meat clean and cool the meat down as soon as possible after harvesting the animal.
Avoid cutting through the backbone and spinal tissues and do not eat the brains of wildlife.
When handling and cleaning game:
Wear rubber or disposable gloves.
Do not eat, drink, or smoke.
When finished handling and cleaning game:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Clean knives, equipment, and surfaces that were in contact with game meat with soap and water and then disinfect them.
While these recommendations apply to general food safety practices, if you are concerned about COVID-19, you may use a product on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) list of disinfectants for use against the COVID-19 virus .
Cook all game meat thoroughly (to an internal temperature of 165°F or higher).
Check with your state wildlife agency regarding any testing requirements for other diseases and for any specific instructions regarding preparing, transporting, and consuming game meat.

Hierarchy of Controls to Reduce the Risk of SARS-CoV-2 Spreading between People and Wildlife  
The Hierarchy of Controls is a standard tool applied in occupational safety and health practices to minimize exposure to hazards by implementing effective control solutions. The Hierarchy of Controls approach is used in subsequent sections to apply the general Hierarchy of Controls principles to the context of minimizing disease spread between people and wildlife.

Implementing controls near the top of the hierarchy leads to an inherently safer approach than implementing only controls near the bottom. Levels of control are not mutually exclusive and can be combined as needed.

Considerations for State, Federal, Tribal, and Territorial Wildlife Agencies
State, federal, tribal, and territorial domestic animal, wildlife, and public health agencies should continue to evaluate the latest science on wildlife health concerns related to SARS-CoV-2 and engage with national and international experts to assess the chances of SARS-CoV-2 spreading  between wildlife and people.

State, federal, tribal, and territorial wildlife agencies may consider additional restrictions or other measures to reduce the possibility that:

Susceptible wildlife are exposed to SARS-CoV-2 by people who are infected;
Infected wildlife spread SARS-CoV-2;
Infected wildlife spread SARS-CoV-2 back to people in the future.
In studying and trying to prevent COVID-19, agencies may consider additional factors like ongoing local human community spread, biosecurity capabilities of various wildlife research and management activities, and agency legal authorities. As applicable, a Hierarchy of Controls approach can be applied to decision-making around risk mitigation, described above.

Considerations for Agencies or Programs Conducting Wildlife Research, Wildlife Management, and Wildlife Control Activities
Activities that involve being close to or directly handling wildlife can increase the chances that people with COVID-19 could spread the virus to people or animals. Wildlife agencies should consider how wildlife research, management, and control activities could impact both human and animal health. The Association of Fish and Wildlife Agencies (AFWA) Fish and Wildlife Health Committee recommends that wildlife scientists, biologists, hunters, trappers, and wildlife control operators comply with existing biosafety and animal handling protocols, observe proper hygiene and disinfection practices, and use appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) when in direct contact with wildlife. Risk mitigation actions should be appropriate for the degree of risk associated with particular wildlife research, management, or control activities, with the understanding that more frequent and prolonged contact between people and animals represents a greater risk of exposure.

There are many ways to prevent the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and other zoonotic diseases between people and wildlife when conducting management, research, or control activities. However, the most effective way to prevent transmission between people and animals is to avoid direct contact with wildlife. This could involve suspending fieldwork or other activities that require direct contact with wildlife. Administrative controls and the use of PPE can minimize the risks of transmission, but they can be more prone to failure than the elimination, substitution, and engineering controls depicted in the diagram above and described below. In situations where contact cannot be avoided, or where the risk of transmission is outweighed by the potential benefits of handling wildlife, engineering controls, administrative controls and PPE can help reduce the possibility of disease transmission. Details about each type of control are provided below.

Wildlife Research and Management/Control Activities: Hierarchy of controls to reduce the risk of SARS-CoV-2 spread between people and wildlife
 
ELIMINATION CONTROLS	
Suspend field and other activities that involve direct contact with wildlife during the pandemic.
Consider whether the work is an essential or urgent priority, or if it can be delayed or postponed.
SUBSTITUTION CONTROLS	
If it is necessary to continue working with wild animals in the field during the pandemic, substitute animal capture or close proximity with remote monitoring methods.
For example, acoustic monitoring (for animals like bats), game cameras, or environmental sample collection (such as feces or hair) may be sufficient to replace capture and animal handling.
ENGINEERING CONTROLS	
Maintain a log of personnel that have conducted fieldwork that involves direct contact with wildlife that are known or suspected to be susceptible to SARS-CoV-2. At minimum, logs should include personnel names, date(s) of field activities, species they interacted with, and duration of interaction.
When possible, consider implementing flexible, non-punitive sick leave policies that help encourage sick employees to stay home.
Promote employee mask and social distancing policies, inside and outside of work.
If animal capture or close contact is essential, select capture methods that maximize distance between people and wildlife and minimize contact time. For example, culvert traps can be used instead of snares for bear capture.
Develop and adhere to a standard protocol for handling and sampling wild animals.
Develop and institute training for personnel conducting fieldwork on risk mitigation measures that reduce the risk of transmission between people or people and wildlife.
ADMINISTRATIVE CONTROLS	
Follow public health guidance on quarantine following possible exposures to SARS-CoV-2.
Perform regular symptom and temperature checks of personnel and consider requiring COVID-19 testing before field work where direct contact with other personnel or wildlife is necessary.
Limit the number of personnel to the minimum necessary to safely complete the task and minimize the number of personnel who have direct contact with wildlife.
Wash hands with soap and water or apply hand sanitizer with at least 60% alcohol before and after physical contact with wildlife, before putting on PPE, after taking off (doffing) PPE, after cleaning or sterilizing equipment, and after using the bathroom.
Maintain the same capture team for the duration of the operation to minimize the number of people contacting other people and animals.
Keep captured animals separate from each other to the greatest extent possible when capturing and handling or holding.
Clean and disinfect all field gear and equipment that may come in contact with wildlife before starting the work, between animals (if warranted), and after finishing the work. The EPA maintains a list of disinfectants  that are effective against SARS-CoV-2.
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)	
Follow appropriate guidance from the state wildlife authority, CDC, and the US Geological Survey (USGS) on the use of PPE when handling or working with susceptible wildlife.
Wear PPE to protect the wearer from exposure.
If the animal being handled is suspected or known to be positive for SARS-CoV-2, or if there is a risk of aerosols being generated by a task or procedure, wear a respirator to prevent nose and mouth exposure to respiratory droplets and sprays and to prevent inhalation of small particles.
Respirator use should occur in the context of a complete respiratory protection program in accordance with OSHA Respiratory Protection standard (29 CFR 1910.134) , which includes medical evaluations, training, and fit testing.
N95 respirators with an exhalation valve and masks with vents should not be used when working with wildlife because they do not prevent the wearer’s droplets from being released into the immediate environment and may therefore expose animals being handled.
Wear protective eyewear, such as face shields or goggles where splashes or sprays could occur.
Wear disposable exam gloves or other reusable gloves (e.g., rubber dish-washing gloves) that can be decontaminated and changed between individual animals.
Wear dedicated clothing and footwear that can be laundered separately after each field work shift or can be bagged and thrown away immediately after completing the shift. Disposable protective outerwear such as gowns, suits, and boot covers may be appropriate depending on the activity.

Considerations for Wildlife Rehabilitation Facilities
Wildlife rehabilitation is generally regulated at the state and federal level. In states that allow wildlife rehabilitation, most require wildlife rehabilitators follow regulatory requirements and permit conditions. These conditions can include using species-specific housing standards, working with veterinary supervision, and following proper husbandry and biosecurity practices. Ideally, wildlife rehabilitation facilities should be able to ensure general biosecurity and disinfection measures are met for a wide variety of disease-causing agents.

While wildlife rehabilitators should always follow permit conditions, implement general biosecurity measures in their facilities, and follow all regulations in response to the ongoing  COVID-19 pandemic, it is essential that they follow additional precautionary measures to reduce the possibility that mammals in their care could be exposed to the virus. These additional precautions are a key component in the success of the risk mitigation actions provided below. It is important to recognize that general stress in captured wildlife, prolonged interaction with humans during captivity, and the unknown health status of the public and other transporters bringing rescued wildlife to rehabilitation facilities may increase the susceptibility of an animal to SARS-CoV-2 exposure and infection.

If rehabilitation is permitted, rehabilitators should maintain wildlife known or presumed to be susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection only in wildlife rehabilitation facilities where protocols to avoid viral transmission can be followed at all times. If these conditions cannot be met, then it may be appropriate to use a wildlife rehabilitator network (with permission of the wildlife agency) to either transfer the animal or refer the public to another nearby wildlife rehabilitation facility that can meet these protocols.

Developing Risk Mitigation Measures
State, federal, tribal, and territorial wildlife agencies and their wildlife rehabilitators should work together to develop risk-based criteria for which species can and cannot be accepted for wildlife rehabilitation and for approving wildlife species for release. The Hierarchy of Controls approach, introduced above, would be advantageous to mitigate risk.

The most effective way to eliminate the risk of SARS-CoV-2 transmission to wildlife in wildlife rehabilitation facilities is to suspend or prohibit rehabilitation. However, there can be situations where the benefits of wildlife rehabilitation, when performed in accordance with established policies and guidelines, may outweigh the potential risks of spreading the virus. In those cases, engineering, administrative, and PPE controls can be implemented to mitigate risk.

In addition to implementing a Hierarchy of Controls approach to risk mitigation during the wildlife rehabilitation period, wildlife agencies working with their rehabilitators should develop criteria for release of any known or presumed susceptible wildlife. This should determine the animal’s basic fitness for independent survival in its native habitat, any risk of exposure to the virus, and if pre-release testing of the animal and/or its caretakers is warranted, practical, and/or feasible. Routine testing of animals for SARS-CoV-2 is not recommended. The decision to test an animal, including companion animals, livestock, and wild or zoo animals, should be made collaboratively using a One Health approach between local, state, and/or federal public health and animal health officials.

As additional information on the susceptibility and transmissibility of the virus in different wildlife species becomes available, there may be certain situations in which testing should be considered, in coordination with appropriate wildlife health officials and veterinary diagnostic laboratories

***Guidance for Handlers of Service and Therapy Animals

We are still learning about the virus that causes COVID-19, but it appears that the virus can spread from people to animals in some situations. CDC is aware of a small number of pets, including dogs and cats, reported  to be infected with the virus that causes COVID-19, mostly after close contact with people infected with COVID-19.

If you have a service or therapy animal, follow your local guidance for acceptable business and social practices. Consider local levels of COVID-19 transmission when evaluating the risk to yourself, your animal, and the people you might come into contact with.

Follow CDC’s general recommendations for protecting pets from infection, when possible. For example, avoid unnecessary contact with people or other animals outside the household. Use your best judgment when taking an animal into a location where it could be exposed to COVID-19.

Ways to protect service animals
Service animals may need to be around other people and animals while working. When possible, both the handler and the animal should stay at least 6 feet away from others.
If a service animal is sick, call a veterinarian, and do not go out in public with the animal.
When possible, do not take a service animal into settings in which people are infected with COVID-19 or facilities where you cannot prevent interactions with people who may have COVID-19.
Avoid contact between sick people and the service animal as much as possible. If contact cannot be avoided, the sick person should wear a mask when around the animal.
CDC recommends that people wear masks in public settings and when around people who don’t live in your household, especially when other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.
Clean and disinfect service animal collars, vests, leashes or harnesses, and other supplies frequently.
Do not wipe or bathe your service animal with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners. There is no evidence that the virus can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of animals.​​ Talk to your veterinarian​ if you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your animal​​.
Do not put masks on service animals. Covering an animal’s face could harm them.
Ways to protect therapy animals
Facilities that normally use therapy animals may not allow them at this time because people in many of these settings are at higher risk for serious illness with COVID-19. Follow local guidance and facility protocols for social distancing, masks, and other ways to prevent COVID-19 from spreading. If therapy animals are invited to a facility or other setting, follow the steps below.

Therapy animal visits require some level of contact between clients and the therapy animal team. When possible, keep animals at least 6 feet away from people and animals not participating in the visit. Handlers and participants should wear a mask during the visit.
Do not take therapy animals to visits if the animals are sick or have tested positive for the virus that causes COVID-19.
When deciding if it is safe to visit a household, refer to CDC guidance on When You Can be Around Others After You Had or Likely Had COVID-19.​
People with symptoms of COVID-19 should not touch, be close to, or interact with therapy animals. If someone was sick with COVID-19, they should wait until they recover to interact with therapy animals.
Before and after every contact, the handler and anyone petting or having contact with the animal should wash their hands.
Do not use items that multiple people handle, particularly if items are brought to multiple facilities between therapy visits (for example, leashes, harnesses, toys, or blankets). If items like leashes must be brought between facilities, disinfect them after each use or facility.
Do not let other people handle items that go into the animal’s mouth, such as toys and treats.
Disinfect items such as toys, collars, leashes, harnesses, therapy vests and scarves, and food/water bowls frequently.
Do not allow therapy animals to lick or give ‘kisses’.
Do not wipe or bathe your therapy animal with chemical disinfectants, alcohol, hydrogen peroxide, or other products, such as hand sanitizer, counter-cleaning wipes, or other industrial or surface cleaners. There is no evidence that the virus can spread to people from the skin, fur, or hair of animals.​​ Talk to your veterinarian​ if you have questions about appropriate products for bathing or cleaning your animal​​.
Do not put masks on therapy animals. Covering an animal’s face could harm the animal.


 